Emergent temporal abstractions in autoregressive
models enable hierarchical reinforcement learning
Seijin Kobayashi*,1, Yanick Schimpf*,1, Maximilian Schlegel*,1,
Angelika Steger1, Maciej Wolczyk1, Johannes von Oswald1, Nino Scherrer1, Kaitlin Maile1, Guillaume Lajoie1, Blake A.
Richards1, Rif A. Saurous1, James Manyika2, Blaise Agüera y Arcas1, Alexander Meulemans*,1 and João Sacramento*,1
1Google, Paradigms of Intelligence Team,2Google, *Core contributor.
Large-scale autoregressive models pretrained on next-token prediction and finetuned with reinforcement learning (RL) have
achieved unprecedented success on many problem domains. During RL, these models explore by generating new outputs,
one token at a time. However, sampling actions token-by-token can result in highly inefficient learning, particularly when
rewards are sparse. Here, we show that it is possible to overcome this problem by acting and exploring within the internal
representations of an autoregressive model. Specifically, to discover temporally-abstract actions, we introduce a higher-order,
non-causal sequence model whose outputs control the residual stream activations of a base autoregressive model. On
grid world and MuJoCo-based tasks with hierarchical structure, we find that the higher-order model learns to compress
long activation sequence chunks onto internal controllers. Critically, each controller executes a sequence of behaviorally
meaningful actions that unfold over long timescales and are accompanied with a learned termination condition, such that
composing multiple controllers over time leads to efficient exploration on novel tasks. We show that direct internal controller
reinforcement, a process we term “internal RL”, enables learning from sparse rewards in cases where standard RL finetuning
fails. Our results demonstrate the benefits of latent action generation and reinforcement in autoregressive models, suggesting
internal RL as a promising avenue for realizing hierarchical RL within foundation models.
We are witnessing a revolution in artificial intelligence (AI),
driven primarily by autoregressive sequence models. These
models, most often built with transformers [1], are trained
using self-supervised next-token prediction on datasets
of unprecedented scale [2]. After pretraining, finetuning
autoregressive models with reinforcement learning (RL)
yields agents with competence in a wide range of domains
and tasks, from mathematical problem solving, to being
helpful assistants in scientific and creative human endeav-
ors. Currently, there is great interest in leveraging RL as a
means to discover new intelligent behaviors, beyond those
present in the original training data [3].
RL efficiency can be greatly increased by starting from
an autoregressive sequence model that has been pretrained
on a wide range of behaviors, such as a large language
model (LLM). From an RL standpoint, self-supervised pre-
training can be seen as imitation learning under partial
observability, where not only is noise introduced and in-
termediate steps occluded, but also latent variables, such
as task descriptors, agent rewards and goals, and their
mental states, are unknown. This setup imbues the re-
sulting models with latent variable inference capabilities
[4, 5] (commonly referred to as in-context learning [6])
that allow adapting to new tasks and environments quickly.
Moreover, pretrained autoregressive models serve as rich
action priors from which diverse, meaningful sequences
can be sampled, enabling efficient exploration from the
start.
Efficient, long-horizon exploration is key for RL to suc-
ceed, in particular when rewards are sparse. This leads
us to an important problem that autoregressive models
face: because these models produce sequences one token
at a time, RL exploration is driven entirely by token-level
variations. However, solely relying on token-by-token vari-
ability to explore can be insufficient to make progress on
hard, sparse-reward problems which require generating
multiple tokens correctly before obtaining a reward. This
observation, which is at the center of the present study,
has motivated a long line of research on hierarchical RL.
Hierarchical RL attempts to exploit the fact that real-world
problemsaretypicallyamenabletoahierarchicalapproach,
wherein a final solution is expressed in terms of temporally-
abstract actions — i.e., reusable subroutines that run for
extended time periods (sometimes called “options”) [7].
Evidence suggests that humans approach problem solv-
ing using such temporal abstractions [8], which implies
that this may be a very efficient way to learn. Importantly,
if temporally-abstract subroutines exist, exploration can
occur at higher levels of temporal abstraction, drastically
reducing the search space relative to token-by-token explo-
ration. However, discovering appropriate subroutines via
deep RL remains a longstanding challenge. While policy
gradient methods have been derived (e.g., the option-critic
[9]), these approaches have theoretical issues and tend
to fail in practice, often converging to degenerate options
[10].
In this paper, we pursue an alternative approach for
temporally-abstract action discovery that builds directly
upon autoregressive modeling. Based on their in-context
latent variable inference capabilities, we hypothesize that
autoregressive action models implicitly learn temporally-
abstract actions represented in their internal activations,
despite being trained to predict only one token at a time.
This hypothesis leads us to introduce an internal neural
network controller in charge of steering the internal ac-
tivations of a base model. Critically, the controller learns
through an unsupervised variational inference algorithm
[11–14], which does not require per-time-step abstract
action labels, in contrast to standard model steering tech-
niques [15, 16].
Corresponding author(s): seijink@google.com, yaschimpf@google.com, schlegelm@google.com
arXiv:2512.20605v2  [cs.LG]  24 Dec 2025

...
Model block l+1
Model block lSwitching unit
...
Model block 1
Hardened switch
Abstract action
Internal 
controller
Internal 
controller
Internal 
controller
Internal 
controller
... En vir onmentT emp. integration
Switching unit
Latent proposal
T ime step t
...
Internal 
controller
Internal 
controller
Internal 
controller
Internal 
controller
Model block l
Model block l+1
Model block N
...
...
a b
T ime step t
Figure 1 | Research overview.(a) We let a metacontroller steer the residual stream activations of a pretrained autoregressive model.
Through self-supervised next-action prediction, the metacontroller discovers how to generate sequences of simple (linear) internal
controllers that change sparsely in time, following a dynamic switching unit𝛽𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1]. In hierarchically-structured tasks, each internal
controller corresponds to a temporally-abstract action that leads the base autoregressive model to achieve a meaningful elementary
goal. (b) We perform RL internally – in the abstract space discovered by the metacontroller – by subsuming the autoregressive model
into the environment and acting in the residual stream on a contracted timescale.
We evaluate our approach on a family of RL tasks that
are constructed in a hierarchical, compositional manner.
We consider both a classic discrete grid world environment
[17, 18], and a more challenging hierarchical continuous
control environment implemented on the MuJoCo physics
simulator [19]. The latter requires an agent to master both
low-level continuous motor control as well as planning at
a higher level of temporal abstraction to exploit the under-
lying discrete, compositional task structure. We find that
the internal controller discovers how to generate higher-
order sequences of temporally-abstract actions that switch
sparsely in time. These abstract actions enable efficient
exploration by drastically reducing the search space size
in novel tasks and simplify credit assignment by reducing
the effective time horizon of the policy. The final product
is a novel hierarchical RL method that directly reinforces
internal activations to solve sparse reward tasks that token-
level approaches cannot solve. Our results demonstrate
the benefits of latent action generation for RL applied to
pretrained autoregressive models.
Key results
We illustrate our approach in Fig. 1, and preview our main
contributions below:
• Next-action predictors inherently develop
temporally-abstract action representations.We
analyze transformers and state-space models (SSMs)
trained to autoregressively predict the actions of
goal-directed agents, whose goals are unknown. We
find that the networks learn to represent (and infer
in-context) a belief about an agent’s goals in their
residual stream activations.
• Linearly controllable temporally-abstract actions.
Thesetemporally-abstractrepresentationsarealsoeas-
ily controllable: a linear residual stream controller
near mid-depth suffices to turn the sequence model
into a closed-loop goal-optimizing policy, capable of
executing a long-horizon plan.
• Compositional generalization in the residual
stream.We show that such controllers can be se-
quenced in time. Residual stream controller sequenc-
ing enables compositional generalization, yielding
agents that combine multiple goals in ways not seen
during training.
• Anewneuralarchitectureforautoregressivemodel
control, which discovers temporally-abstract ac-
tions without supervision.We develop a metacon-
troller neural network that reads from the sequence
model residual stream, and in return applies a linear
controller to it. The metacontroller learns to generate
goal-optimizing controllers that exhibit temporal ab-
straction: it keeps applying the same controller for a
variable number of time steps before switching to a
new one. To discover appropriate temporally-abstract
actions without any supervision signals, our method
relies on two key properties: (i) reading from and
writing back to the residual stream of a pretrained
autoregressive model, and (ii) future-conditioning:
during training, the metacontroller is non-causal, and
is conditioned on a sequence embedding obtained by
performing a first pass through the entire sequence.
• A new “internal RL” paradigm, many orders of
magnitude faster than standard RL finetuning in
hierarchically-structured tasks.We introduce inter-
nal RL: performing RL directly within the residual
stream of the base model, taking internal activations
as observations and metacontroller outputs as actions.
We show that internal RL significantly outperforms
both standard RL finetuning as well as a strong prior
hierarchicalRLmethod[CompILE; 17],achievingboth
higher initial success rates and more efficient credit as-
signment than the baseline methods in hierarchically-
structured tasks.
Results
Linearly controllable abstract action representations
emerge in autoregressive models
Before diving into the description of our internal RL model,
we first analyze the internal activations of autoregressive
2

models pretrained to predict the behavior of goal-directed
agents. Our goal here is to verify that a model trained on
next-token prediction can learn temporally-abstract actions
in its internal activations that we can leverage for inter-
nal RL. To do this, we pretrain our models from scratch
on a behavioral dataset𝐷 comprising observation-action
sequences produced by different expert agents that solve
tasks via stochastic policies of varying degrees of optimal-
ity. The autoregressive model can thus be thought of as
a sequence model of likely observation-action trajectories.
Each element of𝐷 is a sequence(𝑜1, 𝑎1, . . . , 𝑎𝑇 , 𝑜𝑇+1 ) com-
prisedoftheinitialsensoryobservations 𝑜1,actions 𝑎𝑡 taken
by an agent and resulting sensory observation𝑜𝑡+1 at time
steps 𝑡∈ { 1, . . . , 𝑇}. Like behavioral datasets collected at
scale (e.g., those used to train LLMs),𝐷 does not contain
rewards, nor any explicit agent goal and task descriptors.
The analyses presented in this section seek to determine if,
and how, autoregressive models infer abstract patterns in
long-horizon, goal-directed action sequences.
We collect behavior from two classes of environments
where agents perform navigation tasks. Importantly, the
tasks are hierarchically-structured (cf. Fig. 2): though ba-
sic movement skills are a prerequisite, any given task
can be solved with a combination of sub-routines com-
posed of common sequences of basic movements. More
concretely, we study both a discrete grid world environ-
ment that was previously introduced as a testbed for hier-
archical RL [17, 18], as well as a continuous-observation,
continuous-actionadaptationimplementedbyusintheMu-
JoCo physics simulator [19], where a quadrupedal robot
(the ‘ant’ [20, 21]) must be controlled at joint-level. In
both environments, an agent needs to follow a course that
arrives at certain colored locations in a specific order. In
other words, the agents need to navigate between subgoals
whilealsoignoringdistractors(non-goalcoloredlocations),
all while avoiding collisions with randomly placed walls.
Any task is described by a sequence of subgoals, which are
either a single colored location for the ant, or two consec-
utive colored locations for the grid world. A given task
can be mapped to different spatial configuration of the
subgoals, the distractors, and the walls, see Appendix A
for more details on the environments. In these environ-
ments, abstract actions are equivalent to moving towards
a specific subgoal, hence we use the terms “abstract action”
and “subgoal” interchangeably in this paper.
Given behavioral data collected for a set of easy tasks,
referredtoaspretrainingtasksset(seeAppendix AandC.1
for more details on the tasks and how the behavioral data
are collected), we proceed with autoregressive sequence
model pretraining, here a standard causal transformer [1]
for discrete grid world data, and an efficient SSM (Hawk
[22]) for ant control data. The models are pretrained from
scratch by minimizing the cross-entropy
𝐿(𝜃)=
∑︁
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑎1:𝑇 )∼𝐷
𝑇∑︁
𝑡=1
−ln𝑝 𝜃(𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡) −𝜆ln𝑝 𝜃(𝑜𝑡+1 |𝑜1:𝑡),
with 𝑝𝜃 the sequence model, and𝜃 its parameters. For the
case of continuous actions, the likelihood𝑝𝜃(𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡) is mod-
eledasaGaussianwithlearneddiagonalcovariancematrix.
For discrete actions, the likelihood is parameterized as a
categorical distribution with probabilities provided by the
Abstract 
action
Raw action
 Apply torque
 to joints
Complete abstract 
goals (e.g. go red)
a
Subgoals
Pretraining tasks & data
Go green
Go yellow
Go red
Go blue
Compose unseen 
subgoal combinations
b
, ...,,
Post-training tasks
, ...,
Figure 2 | Environment and task design.(a) To complete a
task, an agent must visit in sequence a number of subgoal loca-
tions, each marked with a specific color. The tasks are performed
either in a discrete grid world or in a continuous motor control
environment, illustrated above, where a quadrupedal robot (the
‘ant’) must be actuated at joint level. A task can be described
as an abstract action sequence (the subgoal locations that must
be visited), or as a sequence of low-level motor commands. (b)
We pretrain autoregressive action models and metacontrollers
on unlabeled behavioral datasets containing observation-action
sequences of expert agents performing different tasks. These
sequences do not contain rewards or subgoal labels. We then test
the ability of the models to learn with RL tasks that comprise
longer subgoal sequences, combined in new orders not seen dur-
ing pretraining and metacontroller training.
softmax over the output logits. Note that while the main
objective here is behavioral (next-action) prediction, the
models are also trained on next-observation prediction,
the objective of world (dynamics) modeling [23–25]. The
weight of this auxiliary loss is determined by a scalar hy-
perparameter 𝜆≥ 0; we analyze its role in the Appendix
Fig. A2. Additional optimization and architectural details
may be found in Appendix C and D.
To determine whether the internal activations of the
pretrained autoregressive models learn to identify tempo-
ral abstractions related to the subgoals, we analyze the
internal activations of the models using two common mech-
anisticinterpretabilitytechniques[ 26], linearprobing[27]
and causal model intervention [28, 29]. For the former
(linear probing), we train linear classifiers to decode the
agent subgoals𝑔𝑡 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝐺} on the grid world environ-
ment from the instantaneous (time step𝑡) residual stream
activation vector𝑒𝑙,𝑡 ∈ℝ 𝑛𝑒 after the𝑙-th model block. Fig. 3
shows that linear decoder probability mass concentrates
on the correct latent subgoal as time𝑡 increases, i.e. as
more evidence about the current agent subgoal is gathered.
Moreover, linear decoding likelihood increases with layer
depth 𝑙, peaking close to the final embedding used by the
transformer decoder. Thus, despite being trained only on
one-step action prediction, the autoregressive models learn
to represent temporally-abstract subgoals. This result is
in line with the infinite-data theory of in-context Bayesian
inference in sequence predictors [30], and adds more ev-
idence to the linear representation hypothesis in neural
sequence models [31–33].
3

Ground truth abstract action
Belief distributions after layer 6 (final embedding)
Belief distributions after layer 4
Belief distributions after layer 2
Belief distributions after layer 0 (input embedding)
Time step
t=1 t=2 ... t=T
Figure 3 | Internal belief distributions over abstract actions,
according to a linear probe.Decoding performance of linear
classifiers trained to predict groundtruth abstract actions from
instantaneous residual stream activation vectors increases until
mid-depth (layer 4) and remains strong up until the final embed-
ding vector𝑒 𝑡,𝐿 (here𝐿=6).
For causal model intervention, we ask whether the in-
ternal representations of the autoregressive model can be
leveraged to create a subgoal-optimizing policy. Inspired
by the effectiveness of LoRA finetuning [34], we introduce
a low-rank linear residual stream controller with parame-
ters 𝑈∈ℝ 𝑛𝑒 ×𝑛𝑒, which modifies the instantaneous residual
stream activations in between model blocks at a given
depth𝑙following the update
𝑒𝑡,𝑙 ←𝑒 𝑡,𝑙 +𝑈 𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑙 .(1)
Note that we allow the controller parameters𝑈𝑡 to vary
in time. In this section, we maintain a set of𝐺 separate
controllers {𝑈 (𝑔) }𝐺
𝑔=1, one per subgoal, and manually select
which controller𝑈𝑡 to apply at every time step𝑡 using the
groundtruth subgoal label𝑔𝑡. (We will eliminate the use
of ground-truth subgoal labels later on.) To train the con-
trollers, we condition generation upon the correct subgoal-
specific controller 𝑈 (𝑔), and minimize the cross-entropyÍ
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑎1:𝑇 )∼𝐷 ∗
Í
𝑡 −ln𝑝 𝜃,𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡, 𝑔𝑡) w.r.t. controller pa-
rameters 𝜙 (while holding𝜃 fixed) on a behavioral dataset
𝐷∗. Thisdatasetcontainsbehavioralsequencesthataregen-
erated in the same way as those in the pretraining dataset
𝐷, but with increased optimality, see Appendix C.4.4. Here
and throughout, 𝜙 refers to controller parameters that
were not part of the pretrained model𝑝𝜃, and 𝑝𝜃,𝜙 denotes
a controlled model.
Weevaluatethesubgoal-optimizingcontrollersonapost-
training OOD task set that requires both length and compo-
sitional generalization: as shown in Fig. 2 and detailed in
Appendix A, the post-training tasks recombine subgoals in
orders not seen neither during pretraining nor controller
training. As well, they comprise longer subgoal trajecto-
ries. Fig. 4 shows that these novel tasks can be solved
with a high success rate by simply activating the corre-
sponding subgoal controllers in the correct order, without
any autoregressive sequence model retraining. More de-
tailed descriptions of these mechanistic interpretability
experiments and some additional experimental results are
presented in Appendix B and C.
Our analysis further reveals a distinction between latent
variable belief state representation (at least w.r.t. a linear
decoder) and internal representation control. Whereas
linear subgoal decoding is possible from mid-depth up un-
til the final layer, subgoal-conditioning is best achieved
by inserting a linear controller in the middle of the pre-
trained sequence model, see Fig. 4. There is an intuitive
appeal to this result: the mapping from abstract subgoals
spanning many time steps to actual per-time-step low-level
actions is implemented over multiple model layers. Our
findings join two recent studies [35, 36] that identify the
first half of language models as the strongest for transfer
learning, and as exerting the strongest influence on pre-
dicting future tokens. Given these results, in what follows,
and unless noted otherwise, controllers always read from
and write back to the residual stream at mid-depth of the
autoregressive sequence model.
Unsupervised metacontroller discovers temporally-
abstract actions within autoregressive models
The analyses above show that simple internal activation
controllers can steer a pretrained next-action sequence
model to execute temporally-abstract actions, here navi-
gation to a sequence of subgoals. We have so far assumed
access to subgoal labels, similarly to how current model
steering methods [37] are trained using detailed supervi-
sion information (e.g., on the truthfulness of an answer
[38]oronpersonalitytraits[ 39]). Wenowturntothechal-
lenging unsupervised setting with no groundtruth labels,
where the model must both discover temporally-abstract
actionsfromanunlabeledbehavioraldataset 𝐷, andlearna
selection mechanism that generates appropriate sequences
ofsubgoals,andrelatedabstractactions,inordertoachieve
a larger goal.
To simultaneously learn abstract actions and orchestrate
a b
Figure4 | Mid-depthlinearinternalcontrollersachievelength
and compositional generalization.Both panels analyze success
rate (the fraction of rewarded trials in which the full sequence of
elementary goals defining a given task is completed) as a function
of base model depth (the number of autoregressive model layers)
and controlled layer (the layer at which the internal controller is
inserted, with 0 corresponding to the middle of the base model).
In both grid world (a) and ant (b) environments, inserting the
controller near the middle layer results in better controllability,
as measured by the success rate on the post-training tasks, which
require both length and compositional generalization. To pro-
duce this analysis, we trained one controller per subgoal using
groundtruth labels; to evaluate success rates we activated the
controllers in correct order, again using groundtruth subgoal la-
bels. Results averaged over 5 seeds.
4

their execution, we freeze the autoregressive model after
training on 𝐷, then we augment it with a metacontroller
thatcangeneratethecontrollers, 𝑈𝑡, fortheresidualstream
activations in the sequence model. As before, we continue
training on 𝐷∗ with 𝜃 fixed. But, now, we do not condi-
tion the controller on the groundtruth subgoal — instead
the metacontroller learns how to generate the appropri-
ate controllers at the appropriate times. We describe the
model in full in Appendix D.2, and illustrate it in Fig. 5.
Briefly, the metacontroller is a generative stochastic recur-
rent neural network with an encoder-decoder architecture
that enables sampling controllers sequentially. Because it
outputs the parameters𝑈𝑡 of a controller and not directly a
control vector, the metacontroller can be qualified as a re-
current hypernetwork [40]. The decoder is a feedforward
network that produces a controller,𝑈𝑡, from a controller
code, 𝑧𝑡. The encoder is a recurrent network based on the
gated recurrent unit [41] that specifies the mean𝜇𝑡 and
variance Σ𝑡 of a Gaussian distribution over a random con-
troller code˜𝑧𝑡 ∼ N (𝑧enc; 𝜇𝑡,Σ 𝑡). Importantly, the encoder
is non-causal, because it receives an embedding,𝑠(𝑒 1:𝑇),
of the whole sequence of latent activities. We justify such
future-conditioningusingaformallatentvariablemodeling
argument in Appendix E.1.
Meta-
contr oller
Contr oller
encoder
...
Swit ching 
unit
Model block l+1
Contr oller 
decoder
Model block l
T emp. 
int egration
...
Model block 1
Model block N
T emporal int egration
Int ernal 
contr oller
Int ernal sequence 
embedder
Figure 5 | Details of the metacontroller architecture and the
different modules at play.The metacontroller learns in a self-
supervised way to generate sequences of internal controllers.
Candidate controller codes˜𝑧𝑡 are sampled from a Gaussian with
context-dependent mean and covariance, and are integrated at a
continuous, time-varying rate𝛽𝑡, dynamically determined by a
switching unit. Values of𝛽𝑡 close to zero ignore new controller
candidates; conversely, values close to unity lead to switching to
a new controller. This mechanism is key for achieving temporal
abstraction. The metacontroller features another key design
element, a future-conditioned encoder: during self-supervised
learning, the metacontroller is non-causal, and has access to the
entire sequence of residual stream activations through a sequence
embedding𝑠(𝑒 1:𝑇).
Additionally, the metacontroller includes a recurrent
switching unit, that operates between the encoder and
decoder. This unit determines a time-varying continuous
switching gate 𝛽𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1], which controls the interpolation
between previous controller code𝑧𝑡−1 and a new sampled
code˜𝑧𝑡:
𝑧𝑡 =𝛽 𝑡 ⊙˜𝑧𝑡 + (1−𝛽 𝑡) ⊙𝑧 𝑡−1 ,(2)
where ⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication. Despite its
simplicity, this temporal integrator is critical for the meta-
controller to learn to generate the appropriate temporally-
abstract actions, as we will confirm through ablation ex-
periments at the end of this section.
The metacontroller parameters𝜙 are trained through
the minimization of a self-supervised learning objective,
comprising (low-level) next-action prediction and an addi-
tional prior-matching regularizer,
𝐿(𝜙)=
∑︁
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑎1:𝑇 )∼𝐷 ∗
𝑇∑︁
𝑡=1
h
−ln𝑝 𝜃,𝜙 (𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡, 𝑧1:𝑡)
+𝛼𝐷 KL
 N (𝜇𝑡,Σ 𝑡) ∥ N (0, 𝐼) i
,
(3)
where 𝐷KL(· ∥ ·)denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence
[42]. The inclusion of this regularizer (with weight deter-
mined by the hyperparameter𝛼≥ 0) promotes the gener-
ation of meaningful sequences when sampling controller
codes 𝑧𝑡 from a standard normal distribution, a property
that we exploit in the next section to develop a novel hi-
erarchical RL algorithm. From an information-theoretic
perspective, 𝛼 also controls the variational bottleneck by
regulating the information flow from the acausal encoder
to the controller. As shown in our later analysis, this bot-
tleneck is instrumental in driving the model toward sparse,
subgoal-aligned switching patterns that mirror the under-
lying task structure. Moreover, the choice of an uncondi-
tional prior (i.e., where next abstract action proposals are
independent of past ones) promotes the development of
compositional representations, which match well our hier-
archical tasks. In Appendix E.1, we derive Eq. 3 formally
using a variational information-theoretic approach [43].
The derivation is standard, and follows closely previous
calculations for stochastic recurrent models [e.g.,44, 45].
Ultimately, the metacontroller both discovers the
temporally-abstract actions that underlie the observed
agents’ behavior, and learns to sequence them appropri-
ately in time by implementing respective termination con-
ditions via the switching gate. In Fig. 6 and A3, we analyze
the residual stream controllers discovered by the meta-
controller by plotting the switching gate values𝛽𝑡 against
groundtruth abstract actions𝑔𝑡. We find that the metacon-
troller recovers the groundtruth abstract action switching
times. After training, the switch gate learns to behave in a
quasi-binary, sparsely-switching fashion, despite not being
explicitly regularized to do so. This is a notable finding in
light of the critical role that switching regularization meth-
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Time step
0.0
0.5
1.0
Switch gate
Abstract action
0
1
2
3
Figure 6 | Self-supervised metacontroller discovers
temporally-abstract actions within pretrained autoregressive
model.Three example trajectories from the ant control
environment showing the switch𝛽𝑡 used for temporal integration
at each timestep, and the groundtruth abstract action being
performed (color-coded). Switching (𝛽𝑡 ≈ 1) coincides with a
change in the abstract action being performed.
5

ods play in hierarchical RL [46], and given the simplicity
of the temporal integrator (Eq. 2). The resulting temporal
segmentation is essentially perfect, despite the fact that
both observations and actions are continuous for the ant
environment. Moreover, themetacontrollerlearnstogener-
ate latent controller codes which correspond to meaningful
temporally-abstract actions (e.g., “go to color blue”), that
generalize to new task configurations and switching times
(see Appendix B.3.2 for an analysis).
We next study what happens when the autoregressive
base model parameters𝜃 are not kept frozen, and instead
co-trainedwithmetacontrollerparameters 𝜙throughvaria-
tional inference (the minimization of Eq. 3, now w.r.t. both
𝜃 and 𝜙). This baseline is conceptually close to previous
hierarchical RL methods that use variational inference to
learn abstractions from unlabeled demonstrations (e.g.,
[17, 18]), while using our particular neural network archi-
tecture. To compare the abstract action representations
developed when the base model is frozen vs. when it is not,
we resort to a rate-distortion analysis [43], obtained by
varying the value of the hyperparameter𝛼 (which controls
the rate-distortion trade-off in Eq. 3) over a wide inter-
val, see C.6 for additional details. We trace rate-distortion
curves for both our standard metacontroller (which steers
a pretrained, frozen autoregressive model) and for the
co-trained metacontroller, see Fig. 7.
Intriguingly, we find that a horizontal gap appears on
the rate-distortion curve between metacontrollers with
subgoal-aligned switching (with rate-distortion points
marked by a★ symbol in Fig. 7), and those with slightly
less rate. This indicates that at that rate level, a small
increase in rate dramatically improves the distortion. In
contrast, for the co-trained metacontroller, although the
variational objective is minimized, this structure is lost. For
most values of𝛼, the model converges to a degenerate solu-
tion characterized by a single switch at the very beginning
of the sequence. The fact that subgoal-aligned switching
corresponds to this improved distortion with frozen autore-
gressivemodels,butnotwithco-trainedmodels,showsthat
pretraining builds an internal representation that aligns
well with abstract actions. Furthermore, this also has opti-
mizationimplications: foragivenvalueof 𝛼,thevariational
objective (Eq. 3) is minimized on the point of the rate dis-
tortion curve which has a tangent of slope−1/𝛼. A gap
like the above, with a slope discontinuity, indicates that
for a large range of values of𝛼, the variational objective
is minimized precisely at the region with subgoal-aligned
switching. This analysis therefore confirms that controlling
a frozen autoregressive action predictor is essential for the
discovery of temporally-abstract actions.
Taken together, the results presented in this section
provide strong evidence that our model can both learn
temporally-abstract actions and how to sequence them ap-
propriately, all in a self-supervised manner. We will see
next how this model can be leveraged to speed up explo-
ration in new, harder tasks by many orders of magnitude,
enabling sparse-reward RL to succeed.
Internal reinforcement learning
Finally, we consider the question of how to leverage our
model to learn harder tasks through hierarchical RL. We
study only the challenging sparse-reward setting, where
ba
dc
Figure 7| A rate-distortion analysis reveals the importance of
the controlled, pretrained autoregressive model being frozen
for the discovery of temporally-abstract actions.We compare
our standard metacontroller, which steers a frozen base model
(left column;a,c), with a metacontroller that is co-trained with
the base model it is steering (right column;b,d). The x-axis
represents action prediction loss (the distortion, or negative log-
likelihood; NLL) and the y-axis represents the KL divergence to
the prior (the rate). As the trade-off hyperparameter𝛼 in Eq. 3
is swept over to trace the rate-distortion curve, it reveals a range
of values for which correct subgoal switching representations
develop (marked with a★) when the base model is frozen, but
not for the co-training regime. This holds similarly for grid world
(top row;a,b) and the ant environment (bottom row;c,d).
a single positive success reward is provided per trajectory,
and only when an entire sequence of subgoals is correctly
completed.
We begin this section by establishing that our tasks (de-
scribed in Fig. 2) are difficult for standard RL approaches
to post-training. We first study an adapted version of the
GRPO algorithm [3], which is a strong baseline in the
sparse-reward setting. The details of our GRPO imple-
mentation can be found in Appendix C.5.2. For the tasks
considered here, training an agent from scratch directly
with RL has, for all practical purposes, no chance of suc-
ceeding. Thus, to make the comparison fair, we instead
apply GRPO to the pretrained autoregressive sequence
model, as is now routinely done with LLMs. However, even
with a pretrained sequence model that has been trained
on action sequences related to the subgoals, there is only
a minuscule chance (on the order of one in a million) of
producing successful trajectories by random sampling at
the output token-level. This causes GRPO training to fail,
as the model does not receive enough signal to learn, see
Fig. 8. An inspection of the action sequences generated by
the autoregressive sequence model reveals that while the
model reproduces action sequences seen in the training
data, it fails to explore at a higher level of temporal abstrac-
tion, which would be required to solve these sparse reward
RL tasks. In other words, simply training the sequence
model with policy gradients does not lead the system to
explore novel combinations of subgoals.
Having shown that standard post-training RL fails, we
now introduce internal RL. The key step in internal RL is
to treat the autoregressive sequence model as part of the
environment; actions then correspond to residual stream
interventions, 𝑢𝑡, and observations correspond to residual
6

stream activations, 𝑒𝑡,𝑙. We note that performing RL at
the residual stream level isa priorichallenging. Consider
the problem of learning from scratch a policy𝜋(𝑢 𝑡 |𝑒 1:𝑡)
whose outputs 𝑢𝑡 ∈ℝ 𝑛𝑒 additively control the residual
stream, 𝑒𝑡,𝑙 ←𝑒 𝑡,𝑙 +𝑢 𝑡, without relying on error backpropa-
gation to differentiate through the base model that is being
controlled. This is a high-dimensional continuous control
problem, an exceedingly difficult setting for RL [47].
Instead of directly attempting to learn a residual stream
control policy, internal RL consists of doing RL in the con-
troller code space of𝑧, after the metacontroller is trained
in a self-supervised manner, as described in the previous
section. This approach assumes that the metacontroller
has learned a meaningful switching unit𝑓switch, and a con-
troller code space such that𝑧𝑡 ∼ N ( 0, 𝐼) is a meaningful
prior for sampling abstract actions. Intuitively, the meta-
controller does not suffer from the drawbacks of directly
doing RL in the residual stream for two reasons: (i) the
action space dimension is reduced (𝑛𝑧 < 𝑛 𝑒), (ii) the meta-
controller operates on an abstract timescale, dramatically
reducing the time horizon for difficult environments. The
latter is the key property that can enable internal RL to be
more efficient and succeed on hierarchical, sparse reward
tasks where standard RL methods fail.
ba
Figure 8 | Internal reinforcement learning solves sparse-
reward compositional tasks where standard methods fail.
RL curves for various methods that leverage a pretrained autore-
gressive sequence model for the (a) discrete grid world envi-
ronment, and (b) the ant continuous control environment. We
compare our full-blown internal RL algorithm to a number of
baselines: standard (raw action) RL finetuning; CompILE [17], a
hierarchical RL method that also learns from unlabeled demon-
strations, like ours; internal RL applied to a metacontroller that
has been trained without a temporal integration unit (forced
switching at every timestep,∀𝑡 𝛽𝑡 = 1); and internal RL applied
to a metacontroller that has been co-trained from scratch with an
autoregressive action model, sidestepping the pretraining phase
(see main text for more details). All baselines fail to learn within
a million episodes. Lines and shaded area resp. report median
and the spread between the25th and75 th quantiles computed
over 30 runs (3 metacontrollers trained for each of 10 pretrained
models). We provide this figure in log-scale in Appendix Fig. A5
for a more detailed analysis of the failure modes of the baselines.
In more detail, internal RL consists in replacing an un-
supervised controller encoder which uses privileged fu-
ture information𝑠(𝑒 1:𝑇) by a causal abstract action policy
𝜋(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑒 1:𝑡), and then training it through RL, while keeping
all other modules and their parameters fixed. Conceptually,
this amounts to subsuming the autoregressive model, as
well as part of the metacontroller, into the environment (cf.
Fig. 1). To generate discrete switching events, we further
apply a threshold to binarize the switching rate, i.e., we
replace 𝛽𝑡 in Eq. 2 by𝐻(𝛽 𝑡 −𝛽 threshold) with 𝐻 the Heav-
iside step function and𝛽threshold ∈ℝ a hyperparameter.
This way, until a switch signal (𝛽𝑡 = 1) is emitted by the
metacontroller, the same abstract action is applied, thus
allowing 𝜋 to operate on a temporally-abstract timescale.
Pseudocode for the internal RL environment and algorithm
is provided in Appendix C.5.1.
Fig. 8 shows that internal RL achieves a high success
rate on the post-training task set. Leveraging the temporal
abstractions discovered through self-supervised metacon-
troller learning is crucial for this success, as shown by the
failure of a metacontroller for which the temporal integra-
tion unit is disabled (∀𝑡 𝛽𝑡 = 1). To give this baseline a fair
chance, this ablation is introduced during self-supervised
metacontroller learning, not just when performing post-
training RL. We note that the𝛽𝑡 = 1ablation also achieves
a high initial success rate; this can be seen when plotting
success rates in log-scale (cf. Appendix Fig. A5). However,
only our full-blown (temporally-abstract) internal RL both
achieves high initial success rates and performs efficient
credit assignment, such that RL succeeds. In Appendix E.2
we present a mathematical argument for the efficiency of
credit assignment in internal RL, comparing the variance
of the resulting policy gradients of internal against RL in
raw action space.
Moreover, to evaluate the internal abstractions devel-
oped through autoregressive action modeling, we compare
againtotheco-trainedbaseline, wherebothmetacontroller
andbasemodelarejointlyoptimizedthroughtheminimiza-
tion of Eq. 3. Consistent with the rate-distortion analysis
results (Fig. 7), the success rate of post-training internal
RL remains close to zero. The same holds for CompILE
[17], a comparable, previously proposed hierarchical RL
method that also relies on variational inference to discover
temporally-abstract actions from an unlabeled behavioral
dataset. These results again confirm the importance of the
initial autoregressive foundation model pretraining phase,
followed by base model freezing, for enabling efficient hi-
erarchical RL.
Discussion
In this work, we asked whether the latent representations
of autoregressive sequence models could be leveraged to
develop RL techniques that overcome the inefficiency of
token-by-token exploration and reinforcement. We studied
thisquestionusingtasksthatcontainmultiplesubgoalsthat
can be composed together to create the ultimate goal of
the task. We first showed that an autoregressive sequence
model trained on action and observation sequences from
agents trained on simpler versions of the tasks learn rep-
resentations in their hidden layers that carry information
about the subgoals. Next, we demonstrated that these la-
tent representations in the sequence model can be used by
a set of internal controllers, provided with the groundtruth
subgoals, to solve more complex tasks by compositionally
7

generalizing in time. We then developed a model that uses
a metacontroller to select appropriate temporally-abstract
actions without receiving the groundtruth subgoal labels.
Finally, we showed that directly reinforcing the internal
activation controllers generated by the metacontroller en-
ables learning in more complex, hierarchical sparse-reward
tasks where other RL techniques fail. Altogether, our re-
sults demonstrate that the latent representations of au-
toregressive sequence models can indeed be leveraged to
enable efficient, hierarchical RL.
There is a long-running debate on whether autoregres-
sive next-token predictors can form consistent temporal
abstractions and plans [48], with some researchers dis-
missing them as “stochastic parrots” [49]. Our work adds
a positive piece of evidence to this question. We chose
to study a set of RL environments that fulfill a few key
properties we associate with intelligent agents. For an
agent to master these environments, it must be able to (i)
recombine previous behaviors in novel meaningful ways,
(ii) learn from sparse rewards, and (iii) overcome reward
sparsity by leveraging imitation learning to infer and repur-
pose the goal-directed behaviors of other agents. Learning
from sparse rewards is arguably the ultimate setting for
reinforcement learning, encompassing problem domains
ranging from mathematical reasoning and robotic manipu-
lation to scientific discovery in their most ambitious forms.
Solvingsuchtaskswithoutrelianceonmanualrewardshap-
ing is a critical step toward autonomous agents capable of
navigating complex, open-ended search spaces where the
definition of intermediate progress is often unknown.
Despite their simplicity, the environments are challeng-
ing enough for standard RL methods to fail, including
GRPO (a recent but by now standard method for sparse-
reward tasks), as well as CompILE, a previous hierarchi-
cal RL algorithm [17] that attempts to discover abstract
actions from raw unlabeled data, instead of the internal
representations of an autoregressive sequence model. The
overwhelming success of internal RL over baseline RL algo-
rithms reported here must still be taken with care, however,
given the controlled nature of our experimental setup. In-
vestigating and adapting internal RL to larger-scale models
and tasks is an important direction of future work.
A number of prior analyses have probed the internal rep-
resentationsofautoregressivemodels, lookingfortemporal
abstractions and plans. A recent exciting study provided
compelling evidence for planning in LLMs asked to write
rhyming poems [50], and earlier probing work found that
hidden LLM states have some predictive power over a short
number (four) of future tokens [51]. Another line of prior
work has focused on models trained from scratch in con-
trolled environments, as we do here, notably in games such
as Othello [31, 52] or chess [53, 54]. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to consider continuous environ-
ments with a hidden, discrete, hierarchical task structure.
Despite being trained by gradient descent and only employ-
ing continuous units (both within the base SSM next-token
predictor and the metacontroller) the models nonetheless
discovered the underlying discrete latent task structure.
In particular, the metacontroller developed sparse, quasi-
binaryswitchingunits. Moreover, ourfindingscomplement
recent analyses of convolutional LSTM policies trained by
end-to-end RL to play the Sokoban game [55, 56]. These
studies showed that RL led to the development of planning
subroutines that unfold over multiple timesteps, like the
goal-reaching policies that we found within self-supervised
autoregressive models. We complement these studies by
focusing on autoregressive transformers and SSMs trained
onanext-tokenpredictionobjective, thecurrentworkhorse
of artificial intelligence systems.
Schmidhuber theorized in a seminal paper [57] that a
wake-sleep training loop iterating between training a his-
tory compressor through self-supervised learning (SSL),
and letting a controller use the internal representations
of the former to generate new experiences through RL,
would lead to the acquisition of evermore complex capa-
bilities, including the ability to form and exploit temporal
abstractions and plans. Here, we provide both a concrete
neural architecture following this philosophy, and a set of
experimental results backing these claims. Interestingly,
we begin to see the benefits of alternating between SSL
and RL in large-scale models. For instance, DeepSeek-R1
[3] training also involved one iteration of the RL-SSL cy-
cle, albeit with additional human curation involved in the
(post-RL) SSL phase, and with RL still done at (raw) output
action level.
Our model also displays similarities to LeCun’s joint
embeddingpredictivearchitecture[JEPA; 58]. Inparticular,
the metacontroller introduced here is similar to the JEPA
configurator module, as both are in charge of modulating
a general world model and policy in service of a given
goal or task. However, JEPA is a proposal for learning
abstract observation and action representations without
an autoregressive predictive model, whereas next-action
predictionispreciselyatthecenterofourapproach. Infact,
we show that learning a (raw) action predictor is partly
what enables discovering how to decompose a task into
a sequence of subgoals, one of the open problems in the
JEPA proposal.
The overwhelming advantage of internal RL over stan-
dard RL finetuning reported in this paper deserves further
investigation in real-world environments. A direction that
seems particularly worthy of pursuing is LLM reasoning.
There is growing interest in reasoning methods that lever-
age the internal representations of LLMs for reasoning,
mainly exploring recurrent iteration in neural activation
space [e.g.,59–62]. The metacontroller model presented
in our paper is complementary to these efforts, and may
itself benefit from additional recurrence. Instead, the key
innovationliesonthediscoveryoflatentvariablesthatcom-
press time dynamically. This has the potential to cut the
search space in a reasoning problem and thereby increase
RL efficiency, as it did in a dramatic way in the problems
considered here. A first step in this direction was taken by
Kong et al. [63], who pretrained through variational meth-
ods a language model with a stochastic latent variable, and
already saw promising results on reasoning benchmarks.
Finally, our results open a new avenue for model inter-
pretability and control at scale. Similarly to sparse autoen-
coders (SAEs), a popular method for model interpretability
and steering, the metacontrollers introduced in this work
can be trained through scalable self-supervised learning
and employ an encoder-decoder-type architecture. How-
ever, the two models otherwise have significant differences.
WhileSAEsaretrainedoninstantaneousinternalactivation
8

reconstruction, metacontrollersarepredictiveandinterven-
tive, trained to directly lower output next-token prediction
error by intervening on the residual stream. Moreover, they
maintain internal state, whereas SAEs are instantaneous.
Metacontrollers are thus by design likely better suited if
the goal is foundation model control, and they offer the
possibility of discovering interpretable interventions that
run over an extended period of time. We are excited about
the prospect of investigating whether these capabilities
translate to larger-scale models such as LLMs.
Acknowledgements.We would like to thank Razvan
Pascanu, Jörg Bornschein, Rajai Nasser, Marissa A. Weis,
James Evans, Eric Elmoznino, Sangnie Bhardwaj, Charlotte
Frenkel, Anoop Sinha, Zoltan Szabadka, Dileep George,
Kevin P. Murphy and Doina Precup and her lab members
for helpful comments and discussions, as well as Yul Kwon
and Alice Guan for overall support.
References
[1] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkor-
eit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. InAdvances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[2] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B
Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec
Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for
neural language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361,
2020.
[3] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song,
Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi
Wang, Xiao Bi, and others. DeepSeek-R1: incentivizing
reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[4] Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and
Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context learning as im-
plicit Bayesian inference. InInternational Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022.
[5] Johannes von Oswald, Maximilian Schlegel, Alexander
Meulemans, Seijin Kobayashi, Eyvind Niklasson, Nicolas
Zucchet, Nino Scherrer, Nolan Miller, Mark Sandler, Blaise
AgüerayArcas,MaxVladymyrov,RazvanPascanu,andJoão
Sacramento. Uncovering mesa-optimization algorithms in
transformers.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05858, 2023.
[6] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Sub-
biah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakan-
tan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sand-
hini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom
Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are
few-shotlearners.AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessing
Systems, 2020.
[7] Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Be-
tween MDPs and semi-MDPs: a framework for temporal
abstraction in reinforcement learning.Artificial Intelligence,
1999.
[8] Matthew M Botvinick, Yael Niv, and Andrew G Barto. Hier-
archically organized behavior and its neural foundations: a
reinforcement learning perspective.Cognition, 2009.
[9] Pierre-LucBacon, JeanHarb, andDoinaPrecup. Theoption-
critic architecture. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
[10] Shubham Pateria, Budhitama Subagdja, Ah-hwee Tan, and
Chai Quek. Hierarchical reinforcement learning: a compre-
hensive survey.ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 2021.
[11] Carsten Peterson. A mean field theory learning algorithm
for neural network.Complex Systems, 1987.
[12] Geoffrey E Hinton and Drew van Camp. Keeping the neural
networks simple by minimizing the description length of
the weights. InProceedings of the Sixth Annual Conference
on Computational Learning Theory, 1993.
[13] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding vari-
ational Bayes.International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2014.
[14] Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wier-
stra. Stochasticbackpropagationandapproximateinference
in deep generative models. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning, 2014.
[15] Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip
Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander Pan, Xuwang Yin, Man-
tas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel,
Nathaniel Li, Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen,
Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt Fredrikson,
J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation engi-
neering: A top-down approach to AI transparency.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.01405, 2023.
[16] Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, Gavin Leech, David
Udell, Juan J Vazquez, Ulisse Mini, and Monte MacDi-
armid. Steering language models with activation engineer-
ing.arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10248, 2023.
[17] Thomas Kipf, Yujia Li, Hanjun Dai, Vinicius Zambaldi, Al-
varo Sanchez-Gonzalez, Edward Grefenstette, Pushmeet
Kohli, and Peter Battaglia. Compile: compositional imita-
tion learning and execution. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning, 2019.
[18] Yiding Jiang, Evan Liu, Benjamin Eysenbach, J Zico Kolter,
and Chelsea Finn. Learning options via compression.Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[19] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco:
a physics engine for model-based control. InIEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
2012.
[20] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jor-
dan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional continuous con-
trol using generalized advantage estimation.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
[21] Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and
Sergey Levine. D4RL: datasets for deep data-driven re-
inforcement learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219,
2020.
[22] Soham De, Samuel L. Smith, Anushan Fernando, Alek-
sandar Botev, George Cristian-Muraru, Albert Gu, Ruba
9

Haroun, Leonard Berrada, Yutian Chen, Srivatsan Srini-
vasan, Guillaume Desjardins, Arnaud Doucet, David Bud-
den, Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, Nando De Freitas, and
Caglar Gulcehre. Griffin: Mixing gated linear recurrences
with local attention for efficient language models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.19427, 2024.
[23] Jürgen Schmidhuber.Making the world differentiable: on
using self supervised fully recurrent neural networks for dy-
namic reinforcement learning and planning in non-stationary
environments. Inst. für Informatik, 1990.
[24] Richard S Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for
learning, planning, and reacting.ACM Sigart Bulletin, 1991.
[25] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy
Lillicrap. Mastering diverse control tasks through world
models.Nature, 2025.
[26] Lee Sharkey, Bilal Chughtai, Joshua Batson, Jack Lind-
sey, Jeff Wu, Lucius Bushnaq, Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill,
Stefan Heimersheim, Alejandro Ortega, Joseph Bloom,
Stella Biderman, Adria Garriga-Alonso, Arthur Conmy,
Neel Nanda, Jessica Rumbelow, Martin Wattenberg, Nandi
Schoots, Joseph Miller, Eric J. Michaud, Stephen Casper,
Max Tegmark, William Saunders, David Bau, Eric Todd,
Atticus Geiger, Mor Geva, Jesse Hoogland, Daniel Murfet,
and Tom McGrath. Open problems in mechanistic inter-
pretability.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16496, 2025.
[27] Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding inter-
mediate layers using linear classifier probes. InInterna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[28] Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard, and Christopher
Potts. Causal abstractions of neural networks.Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
[29] Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Be-
linkov. Locating and editing factual associations in GPT.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[30] Pedro A. Ortega, Jane X. Wang, Mark Rowland, Tim Ge-
newein, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Razvan Pascanu, Nicolas Heess,
Joel Veness, Alex Pritzel, Pablo Sprechmann, Siddhant M.
Jayakumar, Tom McGrath, Kevin Miller, Mohammad Azar,
Ian Osband, Neil Rabinowitz, András György, Silvia Chi-
appa, Simon Osindero, Yee Whye Teh, Hado van Has-
selt, Nando de Freitas, Matthew Botvinick, and Shane
Legg. Meta-learning of sequential strategies.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.03030, 2019.
[31] Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg.
Emergent linear representations in world models
of self-supervised sequence models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.00941, 2023.
[32] Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. The linear rep-
resentation hypothesis and the geometry of large language
models. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning,
2024.
[33] Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. Language models represent
space and time.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02207, 2023.
[34] Edward J. Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-
Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen.
LoRA: low-rank adaptation of large language models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[35] Oscar Skean, Md Rifat Arefin, Dan Zhao, Niket Patel, Jalal
Naghiyev, Yann LeCun, and Ravid Shwartz-Ziv. Layer by
layer: uncovering hidden representations in language mod-
els.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02013, 2025.
[36] Róbert Csordás, Christopher D Manning, and Christopher
Potts. Dolanguagemodelsusetheirdepthefficiently?arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.13898, 2025.
[37] Zhengxuan Wu, Aryaman Arora, Atticus Geiger, Zheng
Wang, Jing Huang, Dan Jurafsky, Christopher D Manning,
and Christopher Potts. AxBench: steering LLMs? Even
simple baselines outperform sparse autoencoders. InInter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
[38] Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister,
and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-time intervention: elicit-
ing truthful answers from a language model. InAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[39] Runjin Chen, Andy Arditi, Henry Sleight, Owain Evans,
and Jack Lindsey. Persona vectors: Monitoring and con-
trolling character traits in language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.21509, 2025.
[40] David Ha, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Hypernetworks.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations,
2017.
[41] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau,
and Yoshua Bengio. On the properties of neural machine
translation: Encoder-decoder approaches.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1259, 2014.
[42] ThomasMCoverandJoyAThomas.ElementsofInformation
Theory. Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
[43] Alexander Alemi, Ben Poole, Ian Fischer, Joshua Dillon,
Rif A Saurous, and Kevin Murphy. Fixing a broken ELBO.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
[44] Scott W Linderman, Andrew C Miller, Ryan P Adams,
David M Blei, Liam Paninski, and Matthew J Johnson.
Bayesian learning and inference in recurrent switching
linear dynamical systems. InProceedings of the 20th In-
ternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
AISTATS 2017, 2017.
[45] Taesup Kim, Sungjin Ahn, and Yoshua Bengio. Variational
temporal abstraction.Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 2019.
[46] Jean Harb, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Martin Klissarov, and Doina
Precup. When waiting is not an option: learning options
with a deliberation cost. InProceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
[47] Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel,
Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and
Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforce-
ment learning. InInternational Conference on Learning
Representations, 2016.
[48] Gregor Bachmann and Vaishnavh Nagarajan. The pitfalls
of next-token prediction. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning, 2024.
[49] Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major,
and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the dangers of stochastic
parrots: can language models be too big? InProceedings of
the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, 2021.
10

[50] Jack Lindsey, Wes Gurnee, Emmanuel Ameisen, Brian Chen,
Adam Pearce, Nicholas L. Turner, Craig Citro, David Abra-
hams, ShanCarter, BasilHosmer, JonathanMarcus, Michael
Sklar, Adly Templeton, Trenton Bricken, Callum McDougall,
Hoagy Cunningham, Thomas Henighan, Adam Jermyn,
Andy Jones, Andrew Persic, Zhenyi Qi, T. Ben Thompson,
Sam Zimmerman, Kelley Rivoire, Thomas Conerly, Chris
Olah, andJoshuaBatson. Onthebiologyofalargelanguage
model.Transformer Circuits Thread, 2025.
[51] Koyena Pal, Jiuding Sun, Andrew Yuan, Byron C Wallace,
and David Bau. Future lens: anticipating subsequent tokens
fromasinglehiddenstate.arXivpreprintarXiv:2311.04897,
2023.
[52] Kenneth Li, Aspen K Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas,
Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Emergent world
representations: exploring a sequence model trained on
a synthetic task. InInternational Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[53] Erik Jenner, Shreyas Kapur, Vasil Georgiev, Cameron Allen,
Scott Emmons, and Stuart J Russell. Evidence of learned
look-ahead in a chess-playing neural network.Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[54] Adam Karvonen. Emergent world models and latent vari-
able estimation in chess-playing language models. InCon-
ference on Language Modeling, 2024.
[55] Thomas Bush, Stephen Chung, Usman Anwar, Adrià
Garriga-Alonso, and David Krueger. Interpreting emer-
gent planning in model-free reinforcement learning.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.01871, 2025.
[56] Mohammad Taufeeque, Philip Quirke, Maximilian Li, Chris
Cundy, Aaron David Tucker, Adam Gleave, and Adrià
Garriga-Alonso. Planning in a recurrent neural network
that plays sokoban.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15421, 2024.
[57] Jürgen Schmidhuber. On learning to think: algorithmic
information theory for novel combinations of reinforcement
learning controllers and recurrent neural world models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.09249, 2015.
[58] Yann LeCun. A path towards autonomous machine intelli-
gence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27.Open Review, 2022.
[59] ShiboHao, SainbayarSukhbaatar, DiJiaSu, XianLi, Zhiting
Hu, Jason Weston, and Yuandong Tian. Training large
language models to reason in a continuous latent space.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06769, 2024.
[60] Nikunj Saunshi, Nishanth Dikkala, Zhiyuan Li, Sanjiv Ku-
mar, and Sashank J Reddi. Reasoning with latent thoughts:
on the power of looped transformers.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.17416, 2025.
[61] Zhenyi Shen, Hanqi Yan, Linhai Zhang, Zhanghao Hu, Yali
Du, and Yulan He. Codi: compressing chain-of-thought
into continuous space via self-distillation.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.21074, 2025.
[62] Jonas Geiping, Sean McLeish, Neel Jain, John Kirchenbauer,
Siddharth Singh, Brian R Bartoldson, Bhavya Kailkhura,
Abhinav Bhatele, and Tom Goldstein. Scaling up test-time
compute with latent reasoning: a recurrent depth approach.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05171, 2025.
[63] DeqianKong, MingluZhao, DehongXu, BoPang, ShuWang,
Edouardo Honig, Zhangzhang Si, Chuan Li, Jianwen Xie,
Sirui Xie, and Ying Nian Wu. Latent thought models with
variational Bayes inference-time computation. InInterna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
[64] Danijar Hafner, Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, and Pieter
Abbeel. Deep hierarchical planning from pixels. InAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[65] Seijin Kobayashi, Yassir Akram, and Johannes von Oswald.
Weightdecayinduceslow-rankattentionlayers. InAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[66] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Rad-
ford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algo-
rithms.arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[67] Songlin Yang, Bailin Wang, Yu Zhang, Yikang Shen, and
Yoon Kim. Parallelizing linear transformers with the delta
ruleoversequencelength. InAdvancesinNeuralInformation
Processing Systems, 2024.
[68] Songlin Yang, Bailin Wang, Yikang Shen, Rameswar Panda,
and Yoon Kim. Gated linear attention transformers with
hardware-efficient training. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning, 2024.
[69] Songlin Yang, Jan Kautz, and Ali Hatamizadeh. Gated
delta networks: Improving Mamba2 with delta rule. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[70] Maximilian Beck, Korbinian Pöppel, Markus Spanring, An-
dreas Auer, Oleksandra Prudnikova, Michael Kopp, Günter
Klambauer, Johannes Brandstetter, and Sepp Hochreiter.
xLSTM: Extended long short-term memory. InAdvances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[71] Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence mod-
eling with selective state spaces. InConference on Language
Modeling, 2024.
[72] Bo Peng, Ruichong Zhang, Daniel Goldstein, Eric Alcaide,
Xingjian Du, Haowen Hou, Jiaju Lin, Jiaxing Liu, Janna Lu,
WilliamMerrill, GuangyuSong, KaifengTan, SaitejaUtpala,
Nathan Wilce, Johan S. Wind, Tianyi Wu, Daniel Wuttke,
and Christian Zhou-Zheng. RWKV-7 "Goose" with expres-
sive dynamic state evolution. InConference on Language
Modeling, 2025.
[73] JohannesvonOswald,NinoScherrer,SeijinKobayashi,Luca
Versari, Songlin Yang, Maximilian Schlegel, Kaitlin Maile,
Yanick Schimpf, Oliver Sieberling, Alexander Meulemans,
Rif A. Saurous, Guillaume Lajoie, Charlotte Frenkel, Raz-
van Pascanu, Blaise Agüera y Arcas, and João Sacramento.
MesaNet: Sequence modeling by locally optimal test-time
training.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05233, 2025.
11

A. Environment details
A.1. Gridworld-pinpad
Our grid world environment, referred to as gridworld-
pinpad in the Appendix, is inspired by the previously pro-
posed visual Pin Pad benchmark [64]. In our version, an
agent is located in a grid world, together with uniquely
colored cells (also referred to as objects). Within a task,
the agent needs to step on a sequence of colored cells in a
task-specific order.
A.1.1. Markov decision process specification
• Task:A task is specified by a sequence of colored cells
to visit.
• State:The world is a 2D grid of size𝐺-by-𝐺. There are
𝑂 unique colored cells placed on the grid, as well as𝑊
walls. At any given moment, the agent occupies one
of the𝐺2 −𝑊 cells that are not wall cells. Finally, the
environment state also keeps track of what colored
cells the agent has visited so far in the episode.
• Action:There are 4 actions corresponding to the 4
cardinal directions.
• Dynamics:Given the action and the agent position,
theagentmovestothecorrespondingdirection, except
when it is moving towards a wall cell or outside of
the grid, in which case the action results in a no-op.
A colored cell is considered visited when the agent
moves onto the cell from a different cell. If the agent
successfully visits all colored cells in the right order,
or if the agent visits a colored cell that is not the next
cell specified by the task, or if the episode lasts longer
than𝑇steps, the episode ends.
• Initial state:At the beginning of every episode, the
colored cells and walls, as well as the initial agent
position are randomly sampled on the grid, ensuring
there is no overlap.
• Observation:The agent’s observation is the one-hot
encoding of which object/wall is present in each cell,
as well as the one-hot vector corresponding to the
position of the agent, resulting in a𝐺2 (𝑊+𝑂+ 1)-
dimensional vector.
•Reward:The agent gets a reward of1when success-
fully completing the task, and0otherwise.
A.1.2. Task specification and hyperparameters
For both pretraining and post-training tasks, we use𝐺= 7,
𝑂=8,𝑊=4, and𝑇=100.
Numbering the colors from0to7, the list of pretraining
tasks can be found in Table A1. In this setup, the abstract
subgoals combined to comprise the compositional final
tasks, are given by0−1,2−3,4−5, and6−7.
We choose the post-training task to be0− 1 − 2 − 3 − 4 −
5−6−7−0−1−2−3.
A.2. Ant-pinpad
Ant-pinpad is a continuous control counterpart of the afore-
mentioned gridworld-pinpad. The agent controls the clas-
sic MuJoCo ant [20], with the goal of stepping on a se-
quence of colored cells in a task-specific order.
0-1-4-5-0-1
0-1-4-5-2-3
0-1-6-7-2-3
2-3-0-1-4-5
2-3-6-7-2-3
2-3-6-7-4-5
4-5-0-1-4-5
4-5-0-1-6-7
4-5-2-3-6-7
6-7-2-3-0-1
6-7-2-3-6-7
6-7-4-5-0-1
0-1-6-7-4-5
2-3-0-1-6-7
4-5-2-3-0-1
6-7-4-5-2-3
Table A1| Pretraining tasks for gridworld-pinpad.Each𝑐0 −
...−𝑐 𝐿 list entry indicates a task consisting in visiting in order the
colors𝑐 0,𝑐 1 . . . 𝑐 𝐿 for some length𝐿.
A.2.1. Markov decision process specification
• Task:A task is specified by a sequence of colored cells
to visit.
• State:The state is a 2D plane, divided into grids. The
grid is organized identically to that of the gridworld-
pinpad, and also includes colored cells and walls. The
state is further augmented by the proprioception state
of the ant, as well as the precise coordinate of the
center of the ant in the grid. Finally the environment
state also keeps track of what colored cells the agent
has visited so far in the episode.
• Action:The action is an 8-dimensional continuous
vector representing the torque applied to the ant’s
eight joints.
• Dynamics:Given the action, the ant moves on the
2D plane as usual. When the center of the ant enters
a wall cell or whenever the vertical position of the
ant’s torso falls outside the valid operational range
of [0.2, 1.0], an episode is instantly terminated. A
colored cell is considered visited when the ant enters
the cell from a different cell. If the agent successfully
visits all colored cells in the right order, or if the agent
visits a colored cell that is not the next cell specified
by the task, or when the episode lasts longer than𝑇
timesteps, the episode ends.
• Initial state:At the beginning of every episode, the
colored cells and walls, as well as the initial agent
position are randomly sampled on the grid, ensur-
ing there is no overlap. We initialize the agent’s full
MuJoCo state by first setting the torso’s𝑥, 𝑦 position
in the plane to the center of the sampled grid cell.
Then we add uniform noise that positions the agent in
the simulation anywhere within the boundaries of the
initialgridcell. Wefurthermoresamplearandomyaw-
rotation and turn the agent correspondingly. Finally,
the initial angles for all joints and initial velocities are
sampled uniformly at random within a small range of
0.1units around zero.
12

0-3-2
1-0-3
2-1-0
3-2-1
0-2-0
0-2-1
0-3-1
1-0-2
1-3-1
1-3-2
2-0-2
2-0-3
2-1-3
3-1-0
3-1-3
3-2-0
Table A2| Pretraining tasks for ant-pinpad.Each𝑐0 −...−𝑐 𝐿
list entry indicates a task consisting in visiting in order the colors
𝑐0,𝑐 1 . . . 𝑐 𝐿 for some length𝐿.
• Observation:The observation consists of the usual
proprioception senses of the ant (to which the symlog
function was applied, to ensure no excessively large
values occur), concatenated with the global𝑥, 𝑦 ant
coordinate (normalized to be between−1and1), as
well as the relative position of the various colored cells
and walls w.r.t. the ant, and the local coordinate of
the ant within the current cell.
• Reward:The agent gets a reward of1when the task
is successfully completed, and 0 otherwise.
A.2.2. Task specification and hyperparameters
For both pretraining and post-training tasks, we use𝐺= 4,
𝑂=4,𝑊=1, and𝑇=500.
The set of pretraining tasks can be found in Table A2.
We choose the post-training task to be0−1−2−3.
B. Additional experimental results
B.1. Belief state probing
Fig. A1 displays the performance of linear probes predict-
ing latent subgoals from the residual stream activations of
a pretrained and subsequently frozen transformer in the
gridworld-pinpad environment. These linear probes are ob-
tained by following the procedure detailed in Section C.2.
Importantly, these subgoals are not explicitly encoded in
the data forced through the sequence model. Nonetheless,
throughout training on a large corpus of unannotated goal-
directed behavior the sequence model develops internal
representations of the subgoals. These internal represen-
tations get linearly decodable deep in the network (with
the accuracy jumping from 30% to about 50% roughly in
the middle of the model). Interestingly, close to the output
layer of the model (layer 6 in Fig. A1) the performance of
linear probes deteriorates when plugged into a backbone
trained beyond 100K steps.
105
Backbone training step
0
2
4
6Probing layer
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Accuracy
Figure A1 | Belief state probing at different network layers
and base model training steps.The latent goals governing the
behavior of the data forced through a frozen pretrained sequence
modelbecomelinearlydecodablefromresidualstreamactivations
deep in the network. Here, we display the final accuracy of linear
probes trained to predict the latent goals from the residual stream
activations of a frozen 6 layer transformer. We vary the training
steps of the backbone and the layer at which the probe is plugged
into the sequence model and report the mean performance over
10 backbone seeds.
B.2. Effect of sequence model training hyperparame-
ters on the abstract action representations
In this section, we investigate the effect of various hyper-
parameter choices during sequence model training on the
internal abstract action representation of the base autore-
gressive model. For all experiments, we use the gridworld-
pinpad environment. We measure the quality of abstract
action representation following the procedure outlined in
Section C.3, and by evaluating the compositional general-
ization of the obtained controllers on post-training tasks.
For all experiments, we use the same hyperparameters as
detailed in Section C.3, unless specified otherwise. The
results are presented in Fig. A2.
Sequence model training steps.For all base autore-
gressive model depths (4,6 and 8), we notice that longer
sequence model training generally leads to better internal
abstract action representation, such that the controllers
generalize better to the post-training task set.
Sequence model training weight decay.For all base
autoregressive model depths, we notice that weight decay
during sequence model training is beneficial for internal
representation. Interestingly, too much weight decay also
degrades the representation, which points to a critical reg-
ularization trade-off that has been previously reported in
foundation models [65].
Observation auxiliary loss.Next, we observe that some
amount of auxiliary loss (i.e. training to predict the next ob-
servation as well as action) is beneficial to building internal
abstractactionrepresentation. Withverylowcoefficientfor
the auxiliary loss, we noticed that some models completely
failed to learn the representation; however we suspect this
behavior is an artifact of our particular environment rather
than a general trend.
Expert suboptimality.Finally, we investigate the effect
of the suboptimality of the demonstrations used during
13

100000 200000
Backbone training step
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Post-training success rate
4 Layers
6 Layers
8 Layers
10 3
 10 2
 10 1
Weight decay coefficient
0.2
0.4
0.6Post-training success rate
6 Layers
8 Layers
10 3
 10 1
Observation loss coefficient
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6Post-training success rate
6 Layers
8 Layers
0.0 0.1 0.2
Expert suboptimality
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70Post-training success rate
6 Layers
8 Layers
Figure A2 | Effect of sequence model training step (left), weight decay (center left), auxiliary observation loss (center right),
and expert suboptimality𝜖 (right) during pretraining on the controllers’ compositional generalization.The solid line represents
the median performance over 10 runs, 1 seed for each of the 10 pretrained models, and the shaded area indicates the spread between
the25 th and75 th quantiles.
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time step
0.0
0.5
1.0
Switch gate
Abstract action
0
1
2
3
Figure A3 | Self-supervised metacontroller discovers
temporally-abstract actions, gridworld-pinpad.Three exam-
ple trajectories from the gridworld-pinpad control environment
showing the switch 𝛽𝑡 used for temporal integration at each
timestep, and the groundtruth abstract action being performed
(color-coded). Switching (𝛽𝑡 ≈ 1) coincides with a change in the
abstract action being performed.
pretraining on the resulting abstract action representation.
We achieve this by replacing the expert policy by an𝜖-noisy
one, where at every timestep, with probability𝜖, a random
(non terminating) action is taken. We see that the abstract
action representation is robust against such suboptimality.
B.3. Unsupervised abstract action discovery
B.3.1. Temporal abstraction in the gridworld
In Fig. A3, we analyze the temporal abstraction discovered
inthegridworld-pinpadsetting(c.f. Fig.6fortherespective
ant-pinpad results), by plotting the switching gate values
𝛽𝑡 against groundtruth abstract actions𝑔𝑡. Similarly to
the ant-pinpad setting, we find that the metacontroller
essentially recovers the groundtruth abstract actions by the
switch gate learning to behave in a quasi-binary fashion.
B.3.2. Quality of abstract actions
Figures A3 and 6 reveal that the temporal abstractions
discovered by the metacontroller during self-supervised
learning reflect the ground truth structure of the under-
lying task. In particular, the switching unit aligns with
compositional abstract subgoals governing the observed
data in a quasi-discrete fashion.
In this section, we focus instead on the controller latent
code 𝑧, and provide evidence that the latent space encodes
the actual subgoal-seeking abstract actions that constitute
the compositional task, in a context-agnostic manner. To
achieve this, we focus on the ant-pinpad environment, and
follow the following procedure:
1. For a handful of grid configurations, we first perform
an unconditioned rollout, i.e. a rollout in the envi-
ronment using the sequence model and the trained
metacontroller while sampling the𝑧 from the Gaus-
sian prior, instead of the variational distribution.
2. Next, for each object, we consider unconditioned roll-
out trajectories that correspond to the agent visiting
that object (and nothing else), and collect the latent
codes 𝑧 thatwereactiveatthetimeofvisit. Wehypoth-
esize these latent codes to encode the subgoal seeking
abstract action towards the corresponding object.
3. Finally,weusethoselatentcodesindifferentscenarios,
and demonstrate that the same latent code’s subgoal
seeking property generalizes to other situations.
Generalization to new configurations and switching
timingHere, we investigate the ability of the latent code
togeneralizetonewgridconfigurationsandunseenswitch-
ing times. The metacontroller is trained on successful,
nearly-optimal trajectories where agents rarely demon-
strate "backtracking" – behavior where an agent turns
away from one object to seek another. Consequently, it
is non-trivial whether a latent code injected mid-rollout
can override the base model’s current trajectory. As shown
in Fig. A4, injecting a “go to blue” latent code at timestep
30 causes the agent to immediately correct its course, even
if it was previously moving toward a different object. This
intervention increases the goal-reaching success rate from
23%in the uncontrolled baseline to36%. This is signif-
icant, considering that the latent codes were generated
for different configurations and are the result of a noisy
sampling.
Generalization to out of distribution sequencesWe
further test whether these codes can force behavior that
is explicitly absent from the training data. In the ant-
pinpad environment, the agent is never trained to seek
object 1 immediately after object 0 (c.f. Section A). By
manually activating the latent code for object 1 after the
agentreachesobject0,wefindthesuccessrateforthisOOD
transition rises from10%(baseline) to24%. Note that this
also tests whether the same latent codes can generalize to
14

a new position in the sequence, since they were collected
from trajectories where the ant visited the corresponding
object as the first object.
Ultimately, these results indicate that the metacontroller
does not merely learn to segment time, but successfully
discovers a compact, steering-capable representation of
functional intent—providing the necessary ’options’ for in-
ternal RL to perform efficient credit assignment in complex,
hierarchical tasks.
B.4. Internal reinforcement learning
We complement the main text Fig. 8 by showing the same
plot in log scale in Fig. A5. First, we notice that our inter-
nal RL methods achieves the highest success rate at the
beginning of training, indicating that noise injection in
the residual stream is useful for exploration, compared
to exploration done by sampling raw actions alone. At
the same time, despite their high initial success rate, the
baselines completely fail at exploiting the experience to
reinforce their success. This indicates that proper temporal
abstraction is beneficial not only for exploration, but also
exploitation as well.
C. Experimental details
Here, we describe the details of training the sequence
models (cf. Appendix D.1) as well as several variations of
the controller (cf. Appendix D.2) acting on the then fixed
sequence models to produce the results demonstrated in
this paper. Moreover, in the final subsection we report the
hyperparameters for each experiment.
C.1. Pretraining of sequence models
As a prerequisite for the main experiments that all involve
tampering with the activations of a pretrained model, the
base sequence models 𝑓𝜃 are first trained to autoregres-
sively predict next actions𝑎𝑡 and next observations𝑜𝑡+1
given a sequence of observations𝑜1:𝑡, on a set of meaning-
ful expert trajectories. The details of the expert trajectory
generation and sequence model training are given in the
following.
C.1.1. Expert trajectory generation
Given an environment and a set of pretraining tasks, expert
trajectories are a set of corresponding successful trajecto-
ries. The trajectories are not necessarily optimal.
For the gridworld-pinpad environment, we analytically
solve (via dynamic programming) for the stochastic pol-
icy that solves the shortest path problem, and, at every
timestep, replacetheactionbyarandom(nonterminating)
action with probability𝜖. For all results unless explicitly
specified, we chose𝜖= 0, but show the robustness against
such noise in Section B.2.
For the ant-pinpad environment, we obtain the expert
trajectories by training an RL agent. In order to train a
single agent for the different task, we augment the obser-
vation in the following way: for each cell of the grid, the
agent is given an additional 4-dimensional 1-hot vector,
indicating one of the 4 cardinal directions the agent must
move towards to follow the shortest path at the grid-level.
Furthermore, an additional intrinsic reward corresponding
to the dot product between the agent’s velocity and this
direction is given. The agent is trained by PPO [66], see
Table A3 for the hyperparameters used.
Note that the resulting expert trajectories are not always
successful. The success rate for the pretraining tasks is at
0.8, and for the post-training tasks at 0.7. The success rate
in Figure 8 is normalized by this score.
Hyperparameter Search
Embedding dimension𝑛 𝑒 256
Backbone model SSM
Backbone model depth 6
Train steps 256000
Batch size 1024
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [3e-4]
Weight decay [0.03]
Entropy reg [0.0003]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A3| Hyperparameters for expert training on the ant-
pinpad environment.
C.1.2. Sequence model training
Given a dataset𝐷 of expert trajectories, the sequence mod-
els are trained to maximize the log-likelihood of the data
max
𝜃
log
Ö
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑎1:𝑇 )∼𝐷
𝑇Ö
𝑡=1
𝑝𝜃(𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡)𝑝 𝜃(𝑜𝑡+1 |𝑜1:𝑡)
=max
𝜃
∑︁
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑎1:𝑇 )∼𝐷
𝑇∑︁
𝑡=1
log𝑝 𝜃(𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡) +log𝑝 𝜃(𝑜𝑡+1 |𝑜1:𝑡).
(4)
Switching the sign and reweighting the observation compo-
nent with a coefficient𝜆 yields the loss function presented
in the main text, repeated below for convenience:
min
𝜃
𝐿(𝜃)=min
𝜃
∑︁
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑎1:𝑇 )∼𝐷
𝑇∑︁
𝑡=1
−log𝑝 𝜃(𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡)
−𝜆log𝑝 𝜃(𝑜𝑡+1 |𝑜1:𝑡).
(5)
Table A4 summarizes the hyperparameter choices for
training sequence models on the discrete gridworld and
Table A5 those for the ant. For the sequence models, we
use the hyperparameters specified in Table A15 for SSMs
and those specified in Table A16 for transformers. We use
SSMs for the ant-pinpad and transformers in the gridworld-
pinpad.
C.1.3. Seed
For both environments, we pretrain 10 such sequence mod-
els with different seeds.
C.2. Belief state probing
Given a pretrained sequence model𝑓𝜃 optimized to maxi-
mizeEquation5, wetrainlinearprobestopredictthelatent
subgoals governing a sequence at hand. More formally,
given a sensori-action sequence(𝑜1:𝑇+1, 𝑎1:𝑇) we train a
linear probe 𝑈𝑙 ∈ℝ 𝑛𝑒,𝑛𝑔 to predict the latent subgoal𝑔𝑡
from the residual activation𝑒𝑡,𝑙 at layer 𝑙∈0, ..., 𝐿 at every
timestep 𝑡. Here, 𝑛𝑒 and 𝑛𝑔 denote the residual stream
15

Figure A4 | Controller latent codes implement abstract actions.Here, we illustrate the effect of a latent controller code
implementing the abstract action “go to blue” in ant-pinpad, when forcing a switch at an arbitrary time. The three pairs display a
trajectory without intervention by the metacontroller (left) vs. the one with the metacontroller running on a latent code corresponding
to “go to blue” (right) respectively. The same controller latent code successfully steers the ant towards the desired color in different
context, and regardless of the timing at which it is activated. Some trajectories demonstrate backtracking behavior when the control
is applied.
ba
Figure A5 | Internal reinforcement learning solves sparse-
reward compositional tasks where standard methods fail.
While some baselines see non-zero success rates at some time
during RL training they fail to translate these successes into
a policy maximizing reward. In turn, internal RL manages to
successfully optimize the reward throughout training.
dimension and total number of subgoals in the dataset
respectively and 𝐿 is the number of layers of𝑓𝜃. The belief
distribution over the subgoals at timestep𝑡 is parameter-
ized as
𝑝(𝑔 𝑡 =𝑔|𝑒 𝑡)=softmax(𝑈 𝑙𝑒𝑡,𝑙 )𝑔.(6)
The parameters 𝑈𝑙 are trained to minimize the cross-
entropy loss
𝐿(𝑈 𝑙)=
∑︁
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑔1:𝑇 )∼𝐷
𝑇∑︁
𝑡=1
−log𝑝(𝑔 𝑡 |𝑒1:𝑡,𝑙 ) (7)
Table A6 summarizes the hyperparameter choices for these
experiments.
C.3. Controller compositional generalization
Given a pretrained and subsequently fixed sequence model
𝑓𝜃, a modification of the metacontroller𝑐𝜙 as defined in Ap-
pendix D.2 is inserted into the base autoregressive model
at some layer𝑙∈0, ..., 𝐿 . Here, 𝐿 is the total number of lay-
ers of the base autoregressive model. The metacontroller
used in these experiments deviates from the vanilla version
Hyperparameter Search
Embedding dimension𝑛 𝑒 256
Backbone model Transformer
Backbone model depth 6
Observation coefficient𝜆[0, 0.01]
Train steps 256000
Batch size 1024
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [3e-4]
Weight decay [0.03]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A4| Hyperparameters for sequence model training on
the gridworld environment.
Hyperparameter Search
Embedding dimension𝑛 𝑒 256
Backbone model SSM
Backbone model depth 8
Observation coefficient𝜆10
Train steps 204800
Batch size 512
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate 3e-4
Weight decay 0.03
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A5| Hyperparameters for sequence model training on
the ant-pinpad environment.
in how the latent codes𝑧𝑡 are computed. Instead of sam-
pling ˜𝑧𝑡 from a normal distribution and then temporally
integrating according to
𝑧𝑡 =𝛽 𝑡 ⊙˜𝑧𝑡 + (1−𝛽 𝑡) ⊙𝑧 𝑡−1
𝛽𝑡 = 1is forced for all𝑡. Moreover, in these experiments,
the ground truth information about abstract behaviour
is injected via ˜𝑧𝑡. In particular, the expert trajectories
(𝑜1:𝑇+1, 𝑎1:𝑇) are annotated with the IDs of the abstract ac-
tions that governed the behavior during generation. Note
that, contrary to the raw action𝑎𝑡, the abstract action and
hence theidentifier ID𝑡 provided to the metacontroller only
change sparsely in time. Formally, given the ground truth
16

Hyperparameter Search
Embedding dimension𝑛 𝑒 256
Backbone train steps [16K, 32K, 64K, 128K, 256K]
Probe layers [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
Train steps probe 8000
Batch size 512
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [1e-3]
Weight decay [0.0]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A6| Hyperparameters for belief state probing in grid-
world.
labels, the controller latent code at time step𝑡 is given by
𝑧𝑡 =˜𝑧𝑡 =onehot(ID t, 𝐾),
the onehot encoding ofID𝑡. Here, 𝐾 denotes the total num-
ber of unique abstractactions inthe datasetD. With access
to this additional privileged information, we train the pa-
rameters 𝜙 to further maximize the data log-likelihood (cf.
Equation 5).
Table A7 summarizes the hyperparameter choices for
the controller compositional generalization on the discrete
gridworld and Table A8 those for the ant.
Hyperparameter Search
Observation coefficient𝜆0
Controller model Low-rank (16) linear
Controlled layer𝑙 𝐿
2
Train steps 3200
Batch size 512
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [1e-3]
Weight decay [0.03]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A7| Hyperparameters for the controller compositional
generalization experiment on the gridworld environment.
Hyperparameter Search
Observation coefficient𝜆0
Controller model Linear
Controlled layer𝑙 𝐿
2
Train steps 3200
Batch size 256
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [3e-4]
Weight decay [0.03]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A8| Hyperparameters for the controller compositional
generalization experiment on the ant-pinpad environment.
C.4. Unsupervised abstract action discovery
Given a pretrained, frozen base sequence model𝑓𝜃, the
metacontroller 𝑐𝜙 as described in Appendix D.2 is inserted
into the base model at some layer𝑙∈0, ..., 𝐿 where 𝐿 is the
base model depth. With𝜃 frozen, the metacontroller pa-
rameters 𝜙 are trained to (further) minimize a regularized
NLL. Note that the metacontroller𝑐𝜙 learns to generate
and make use of an acausal embedding𝑠(𝑒 1:𝑇). Thus, by
controlling the base model, the metacontroller can mini-
mize the NLL beyond the loss-level attained by the causal
base autoregressive model. Beyond optimizing Equation 5,
the posterior over controller latent codes
˜𝑧𝑡 ∼ N (𝑧enc;𝜇 𝑡,Σ 𝑡)
is regularized so that at test time meaningful controller
latent codes can be sampled from the priorN (0, 𝐼). To
allow this, the Kullback-Leibler divergence between both
distributions
𝐷KL
 N (𝜇𝑡,Σ 𝑡) ∥ N (0, 𝐼)  (8)
is added to the NLL objective. Putting everything together,
and adding regularization strength𝛼 the metacontroller
𝑐𝜙 is trained to minimize the loss
𝐿(𝜙)=
∑︁
(𝑜1:𝑇+1 ,𝑎1:𝑇 )∼𝐷
𝑇∑︁
𝑡=1
−log𝑝 𝜙,𝜃 (𝑎𝑡 |𝑜1:𝑡)
−𝜆log𝑝 𝜙,𝜃 (𝑜𝑡+1 |𝑜1:𝑡)
+𝛼𝐷 KL
 N (𝜇𝑡,Σ 𝑡) ∥ N (0, 𝐼) 
(9)
where 𝑝𝜙,𝜃 denotes the probability computed by the se-
quence model 𝑓𝜃 when controlled by 𝑐𝜙. This objective
is motivated as the evidence lower bound (ELBO) in Sec-
tionE.1. Again, notethatonlytheparameters 𝜙aretrained
while the sequence model𝜃remains frozen.
The hyperparameters for training the metacontroller in
gridworld- and ant-pinpad are summarized in Table A9
and Table A10, respectively.
Hyperparameter Search
Observation coefficient𝜆0
KL strength𝛼[0,0.05,0.1,0.17,0.3,0.5,1]
Controller model Low-rank (16) linear
Controlled layer𝑙 𝐿
2
Latent code dimension𝑛𝑧 8
Controller Encoder hidden layer 64
Controller Decoder hidden layer 32
GRU dimension𝑛ℎ 32
Sequence embedding dimension𝑛𝑠 32
Train steps 64000
Batch size 512
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [1e-3]
Weight decay [0.03]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A9| Hyperparameters for unsupervised abstract action
discovery on the gridworld environment.
C.4.1. Baseline – forced resets
This baseline aims to answer the question whether a meta-
controller not factorizing the controller latent code𝑧𝑡 into
explicit subsequences via𝛽𝑡 discovers abstract actions suit-
able for subsequent internal RL. To do so, we perform the
exact same experiment as described so far in this subsec-
tion with the only difference that𝛽𝑡 =1is forced at every
17

Hyperparameter Search
Observation coefficient𝜆0
KL strength𝛼[0,0.05,0.1,0.17,0.3,0.5,1]
Controller model Linear
Controlled layer𝑙 𝐿
2
Latent code dimension𝑛𝑧 8
Controller Encoder hidden layer 64
Controller Decoder hidden layer 32
GRU dimension𝑛ℎ 32
Sequence embedding dimension𝑛𝑠 32
Train steps 32000
Batch size 128
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [3e-4]
Weight decay [0.03]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
TableA10 | Hyperparametersforunsupervisedabstractaction
discovery on the ant-pinpad environment.
timestep. Hence, 𝑧𝑡 is equal to the latent controller code
proposal˜𝑧𝑡.
C.4.2. Baseline – metacontroller cotraining
This baseline investigates whether the two stage approach
of first training the sequence model𝑓𝜃, freezing it, and only
then training the metacontroller𝑐𝜙 yields different results
than cotraining both𝜃 and 𝜙. In this pursuit, we perform
2 experiments: for gridworld, no pretrained𝜃 is assumed
and instead both𝜃 and 𝜙 are both randomly initialized
and jointly trained to optimize the regularized NLL defined
in Equation 3 (else used for training𝜙 in a frozen𝑓𝜃). For
ant-pinpad, 𝜃 is initialized to the pretrained parameter, but
we still jointly train𝜙and𝜃to optimize the objective.
C.4.3. Baseline – CompILE
We adapted CompILE [17, 18] as best as possible to our
setting.
On a high level, CompILE is very similar to our cotrain-
ing baselines: it is a latent variable model (albeit with a
different set of latent variables) which takes a sequence of
observations and output, for each timestep, a continuous
latent variable𝑧 drawn from a Gaussian that then condi-
tion a policy trained to imitate the action in the trajectory.
Similarly to us, it is a variational inference approach to
discovering the abstract actions, except that it does not
leverage the internal representation of a pretrained model.
CompILE also infers the switching latent variables𝛽, and
requires a prior distribution over the switching rate and
the maximum number𝑀 of abstract actions (or segments)
in all sequences.
To make things comparable, we adopt CompILE to our
architecture by drop-in replacing the metacontroller by
the CompILE module which generates the latent code𝑧,
while keeping everything else identical. In particular, the
same sequence model architecture is used and internally
controlled by 𝑧. Nevertheless, to remain close to the origi-
nal architecture of CompILE, the module generating the
latent code takes as input the raw input, instead of the
residual stream activation. To compensate for the poten-
tial loss in expressivity, we use as the recurrent encoder of
the module the same architecture as the first half of the
sequence model. The parameters for the distribution of the
latent variables are then generated by a one hidden layer
MLPs with hidden dimension𝑛ℎ. Due to the difficulty of
performing parallel inference when using the algorithm,
the sequence model parameters𝜃 are initialized to the
pretraining value, such that training can be shortened.
Table A11 (resp. A12) shows the hyperparameter used
for gridworld (resp. ant-pinpad).
Hyperparameter Search
MLP hidden dim𝑛ℎ 32
Observation coefficient𝜆0
KL strength for latent𝑧 𝛼𝑧 [0.003,0.01,0.03,0.1,0.3,1]
KL strength for latent𝛽 𝛼𝛽 [0.003,0.01,0.03,0.1,0.3,1]
Gumbel softmax temperature for𝛽[0.5, 1]
Maximum number of segments𝑀4
Prior switching rate 10
Controller model Low-rank (16) linear
Controlled layer𝑙 𝐿
2
Latent code dimension𝑛𝑧 8
Train steps 32000
Batch size 512
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [1e-3]
Weight decay [0.03]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A11| Hyperparameters for CompILE training on the
gridworld environment.
Hyperparameter Search
MLP hidden dim𝑛ℎ 32
Observation coefficient𝜆0
KL strength for latent𝑧 𝛼𝑧 [0.003,0.01,0.03,0.1,0.3,1]
KL strength for latent𝛽 𝛼𝛽 [0.003,0.01,0.03,0.1,0.3,1]
Gumbel softmax temperature for𝛽[0.5, 1]
Maximum number of segments𝑀4
Prior switching rate 10
Controller model Linear
Controlled layer𝑙 𝐿
2
Latent code dimension𝑛𝑧 8
Train steps 32000
Batch size 128
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [3e-4]
Weight decay [0.03]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A12| Hyperparameters for CompILE training on the
ant-pinpad environment.
C.4.4. Metacontroller training dataset
While our experiments reveal that the emergence of ab-
stractactionsinthesequencemodelisrobusttosuboptimal-
ity (c.f. Appendix B.2) the opposite holds for discovering
these abstract actions in the frozen sequence model with
the metacontroller. Empirically, we observe that as the
demonstrations used for training the metacontroller get
cleaner (i.e. the closer they resemble the optimal stochastic
policy), the ability of the metacontroller to compress the
abstract actions onto a latent space improves. Therefore,
fortrainingthemetacontroller, forant-pinpad, wegenerate
trajectories by taking the mean of the Gaussian distribution
18

generated by the expert for each timestep instead of sam-
pling from it. Similarly, for grid we set the suboptimality
degree𝜖=0, to obtain clean expert demonstration.
C.4.5. Seed
For all environments and methods, for each of the 10 pre-
trained sequence models and each of the hyperparameter
configurations, we perform this unsupervised abstract ac-
tion discovery over 3 different seeds.
C.5. RL experiments
C.5.1. Internal RL
We present in algorithm 2 the initialization function for the
internal RL environment, and 1 the effective internal RL
environment step function, given the original environment,
a pretrained base autoregressive model and corresponding
meta controller. Algorithm 3 shows the full training loop.
The hyperparameters for training the agent in gridworld-
and ant-pinpad are summarized in Table A13 and Ta-
ble A14, respectively.
Hyperparameter Search
Policy model SSM
Policy depth 1
Policy Embedding dimension 256
Train steps 100000
Batch size 1024
Entropy regularizer 0
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [3e-5]
Weight decay [0.0]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A13| Hyperparameters for internal RL on the gridworld
environment.
Hyper Parameter Search
Policy model SSM
Policy depth 1
Policy Embedding dimension 256
Train steps 51200
Batch size 256
Entropy regularizer 0
Optimizer AdamW
Learning rate [3e-5]
Weight decay [0.0]
𝛽s (0.9, 0.999)
Scheduler
Constant learning rate
Table A14 | Hyperparameters for internal RL on the ant-
pinpad environment.
C.5.2. RL algorithm details
For all RL experiments, we used an RL algorithm suitable
for sparse, single final reward setting. The algorithm is
related to the GRPO algorithm, except for the notion of
group which is absent in our setting. Similarly to GRPO, we
modify the standard Proximal Policy Optimization [PPO;
66] framework by replacing the learned value function
(critic) with an empirical advantage estimation.
Algorithm 1:The effective internal RL environment
step function
require:Original environment𝐸, switching unit
𝑓switch, controller decoder𝑓hyp, model
blocks𝑓 block:𝑙 up to layer𝑙, model blocks
𝑓block𝑙: from layer𝑙. The function takes the
abstract action𝑧, and the internal state𝑠
as inputs.
step(𝑧, 𝑠):
𝛽←0
done←False
𝑟acc ←0
(𝑒, ℎswitch, ℎblock𝑙: , ℎblock:𝑙 ) ←𝑠
while𝛽 < 𝛽 threshold do
𝑈←𝑓 hyp(𝑧)
𝑎, ℎblock𝑙: ∼𝑓 block𝑙: (𝑒+𝑈𝑒, ℎ block𝑙: )
𝑜, 𝑟,done∼𝐸.step(𝑎)
𝑒, ℎblock:𝑙 ←𝑓 block:𝑙 (𝑜, ℎblock:𝑙 )
𝛽, ℎswitch ←𝑓 switch (𝑒, 𝑧, ℎswitch)
𝑟acc ←𝑟 acc +𝑟
𝑠← (𝑒, ℎ switch, ℎblock𝑙: , ℎblock:𝑙 )
return(𝑒, 𝑟 acc,done), 𝑠
Algorithm 2:The internal RL initialization function
require:Original environment𝐸, switching unit
𝑓switch, controller decoder𝑓hyp, model
blocks𝑓 block:𝑙 up to layer𝑙, model blocks
𝑓block𝑙: from layer𝑙.
init():
𝑜, 𝑟,done∼𝐸.init()
ℎblock𝑙: ←𝑓 block𝑙: .init()
ℎblock:𝑙 ←𝑓 block:𝑙 .init()
ℎswitch ←𝑓 switch.init()
𝑒, ℎblock:𝑙 ←𝑓 block:𝑙 (𝑜, ℎblock:𝑙 )
𝛽, ℎswitch ←𝑓 switch (𝑒, 𝑧, ℎswitch)
𝑠← (𝑒, ℎ switch, ℎblock𝑙: , ℎblock:𝑙 )
return(𝑒, 𝑟,done), 𝑠
Algorithm 3:The internal RL full algorithm
require:Policy𝜋 𝜃
forepoch𝑒=1. . . 𝐸do
B ← []
forbatch element𝑏=1. . . 𝐵do
(𝑒, 𝑟, 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒), 𝑠←init()
ℎ𝜋 ←𝜋 𝜃.init()
𝜏← []
whilenot donedo
# acting on a temporally abstract
timescale (see algorithm 1)
𝑧, ℎ𝜋 ∼𝜋 𝜃(𝑒, ℎ𝜋)
𝜏.append((𝑒, 𝑟, 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒, 𝑧))
(𝑒, 𝑟, 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒), 𝑠←step(𝑧, 𝑠)
𝜏.append((𝑒, 𝑟, 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑒, 𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑒))
B.append(𝜏)
Update policy𝜋 𝜃 usingBby maximizing the
objective in Eq 10
Output𝜋 𝜃
19

Objective function.We optimize the policy by maximiz-
ing a clipped surrogate objective similar to PPO. The loss
is defined as:
𝔼𝜏
h∑︁
𝑡
min( 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡 |𝑠1:𝑡)
𝜋𝜃old (𝑎𝑡 |𝑠1:𝑡) ,clip( 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡 |𝑠1:𝑡)
𝜋𝜃old (𝑎𝑡 |𝑠1:𝑡) ,1−𝜖,1+𝜖))A 𝜏
i
(10)
where 𝜋𝜃 is the current policy and𝜋𝜃old is the previous
policy,A 𝑡 is the relative advantage of the trajectory𝜏.
Relative advantage estimation.We adopt the critic-free
approach to estimating the advantage.
The relative advantageA𝜏 measures how much better
(or worse) a specific trajectory𝜏is compared to the average
quality of the entire batch of size𝐵. It is calculated by
normalizing the reward𝑅(𝜏) relative to the batch’s mean
¯𝑅and standard deviation𝜎 𝑅:
¯𝑅= 1
𝐵
𝐵∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑅(𝜏 𝑖)
𝜎𝑅 =
vut
1
𝐵
𝐵∑︁
𝑖=1
(𝑅(𝜏 𝑖) − ¯𝑅)2
A𝜏 = 𝑅(𝜏) − ¯𝑅
𝜎𝑅 +𝛿 ,
where 𝛿is a small constant (e.g.,10−3) to ensure numerical
stability and prevent division by zero.
C.5.3. Baseline – raw action RL
For the raw action RL baseline, we simply use the pre-
trained sequence model without any metacontroller, and
finetuneitonthepost-trainingtaskusingtheRLalgorithms
described in section C.5.2, in raw action space. Since for
the raw action RL baseline, there is no unsupervised ab-
stract action discovery phase, we instead do the RL over 3
seeds.
C.5.4. Baseline – others
For all other baselines, we simply perform internal RL
with the respective metacontrollers obtained during the
unsupervised abstract action discovery, cf section C.4.
C.5.5. Seed and Hyperparameter selection
For each method, we scan over different learning rates
(0.000003, 0.00001, 0.00003, 0.0001, 0.0003) and pick
the learning rate and hyperparameter configuration from
the unsupervised abstract action discovery with the best
median RL performance over the 10 pretrained model and
3 seed.
C.6. Rate-distortion curve
The rate distortion curve is plotted after performing the un-
supervised abstract action discovery with the same hyper-
parameters as described in section C.4, with the exception
of using the Gumbel-Sigmoid trick for the switching units
as derived in E.1 for gridworld-pinpad, as it resulted in a
cleaner Pareto frontier. As the pretrained sequence models
have each different Pareto frontier which would hide its
structure, we pick one sequence model at random, and
instead do the unsupervised abstract action training with
10 seeds on each of the different KL strength𝛼. We do this
for our method, as well as the metacontroller cotraining
baseline.
The sum of switching value is computed by hard-
thresholding the continuous switching value with
𝛽threshold = 0.5as we do in the internal RL (cf algorithm
1), and taking the average sum over trajectories. We
manually checked the forget patterns to label whether the
switching patterns aligned with the subgoal change.
D. Architecture details
D.1. Sequence model
We parametrize the base model as an autoregressively-
trained multi-layer sequence model 𝑓𝜃. The specific in-
stantiations of 𝑓𝜃 detailed below utilize either standard
transformer [1] or recurrent neural network (also com-
monly referred to as state-space model, SSM) layers. From
the latter family ([22, 67–73] and others), we choose the
Hawk [22] due to its simplicity and computational effi-
ciency.
D.1.1. SSM
For SSM-based sequence models, we employ a standard
pre-normalization layer architecture. Inputs are normal-
ized before being fed into the recurrent Hawk sequence
mixing block [22], whose output is added back to the resid-
ual stream. This is followed by an MLP channel-mixing
block that similarly applies normalization to its input be-
fore adding its output back to the residual stream.
Hyperparameter Value
Embedding dimension𝑛 𝑒 256
Hawk LRU dimension 256
Number of heads 8
Variance scaling of all initializers 0.1
MLP hidden layer dimension 512
MLP nonlinearity ReLU
Table A15 | Hyperparameters for Hawk state space model
layers.
D.1.2. Transformer
For transformer-based models, we employ a standard pre-
normalization layer architecture. We first compute relative
position embeddings to serve as attention biases. Inputs
are then normalized and fed into the Multi-Head Atten-
tion sequence mixing block (incorporating these biases),
whose output is added back to the residual stream. This
is followed by an MLP channel-mixing block that applies
normalization to its input before adding its output back to
the residual stream.
D.2. Metacontroller architecture
Design principles.The metacontroller is designed to act
inside a frozen, autoregressive sequence model backbone.
It does so by modulating the residual stream activations
at some backbone layer via simple, internal controllers.
Manipulatingtheresidualstreamallowsthemetacontroller
to implement temporally abstract actions that turn the
20

Hyperparameter Value
Embedding dimension𝑛 𝑒 256
Attention head dimension 64
Number of heads 4
Variance scaling of all initializers 0.1
MLP hidden layer dimension 512
MLP nonlinearity ReLU
Number of buckets for relative positional encodings 32
Table A16|Hyperparameters for Transformer model layers.
sequence model into a subgoal-optimizing policy pursuing
a selected goal over multiple raw action timesteps.
These temporally abstract actions implement the sub-
goals governing the behaviour of the agents whose trajecto-
ries constitute the offline data available for metacontroller
training. To discover these abstract actions, the metacon-
troller tracks a recurrent latent variable𝑧𝑡 capturing the
subgoal active at step𝑡 and then translates it into an ac-
tion (linear controller). The true posterior𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑒1:𝑇) over
this latent 𝑧𝑡 is inherently acausal since (sub)goals only
materialize over an entire trajectory. To make this tan-
gible consider an agent that is placed in the gridworld
with the intent to “go to red”. As the agent takes its first
goal-directed actions, an outside observer will have a hard
time determining the underlying goal since reaching other
colored cells like green might require taking the very same
first actions. Only as the action sequence further unfolds
and the evidence of the agent’s intent becomes conclusive
the goal can be identified. These considerations underline
that to correctly infer the subgoal at step𝑡, in general, the
metacontroller needs access to sequence-level information.
They also reveal that the purely causal backbone is limited
to, at best, discover a powerful online inference algorithm
for latent subgoals.
Now, as is the case for real world data, assume that the
offline trajectories include the behavior of agents complet-
ing subgoals and subsequently switching to new subgoals.
It is desirable for the metacontroller to infer the latent𝑧𝑡
in a way that makes the factorization into subgoals acces-
sible. This boils down to parameterizing𝑧𝑡 as a temporal
composition of latent codes˜𝑧𝑡 orchestrated by a switching
unit 𝛽𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1]. Selecting 𝛽𝑡 ≈ 1implements switching
subgoals and, equally important to achieve temporally con-
sistent behaviour,𝛽𝑡 ≈ 0allows to maintain the previous
subgoal. While, as discussed above, the˜𝑧𝑡 needs to be
acausal, 𝛽𝑡 is parameterized to be causal. This allows the
metacontroller to identify when to switch goals at test
time (when no acausal information is available). For more
justification of this choice, see Section E.1.
High-level description.On a high level, the metacon-
troller 𝑐𝜙 (cf. Fig. A6) can be viewed as a recurrent hy-
pernetwork [40]. It acts inside a frozen sequence model
backbone 𝑓𝜃 by emittinginternal, linear controllers𝑈𝑡 alter-
ing the residual activations at timestep𝑡. Architecturally,
it is an encoder-decoder generative model that allows to
sample controllers that, after training, implement abstract
actions. First, at every timestep the recurrentcontroller
encoderstochastically proposes controller latent codes˜𝑧𝑡
conditioned on an acausal embedding𝑠(𝑒 1:𝑇) generated
by theinternal sequence embedder. Also per timestep, the
switching unitemits a temporal integration rate𝛽𝑡. Subse-
quently, thetemporal integration unittakes per timestep
latent proposals and composes them sparsely in time by
applying the temporal integration rate. The temporally
integrated latent controller codes𝑧𝑡 are then mapped to
instantaneous controllers by thecontroller decoder.
Meta-
contr oller
Contr oller
encoder
...
Swit ching 
unit
Model block l+1
Contr oller 
decoder
Model block l
T emp. 
int egration
...
Model block 1
Model block N
T emporal int egration
Int ernal 
contr oller
Int ernal sequence 
embedder
Figure A6|Metacontroller architecture(same as Fig. 5).
Architectural details.Adopting the standard design
principles for sequence models, the pretrained sequence
model 𝑓𝜃 is built from𝐿 stacked layers (cf. Appendix D.1).
While processing the sequence of inputs𝑜1:𝑇 to predict
(𝑎1:𝑇, 𝑜2:𝑇+1) the sequence model generates a sequence of
residual stream activations𝑒1:𝑇,𝑙 at each layer𝑙∈ { 0, ..., 𝐿}
(0refers to the residual activations immediately before
the first layer). The metacontroller operates inside the
sequence model at layer𝑙 by reading these residual activa-
tions𝑒 1:𝑇,𝑙 and applying an internal, linear controller
ˆ𝑒𝑡,𝑙 =𝑒 𝑡,𝑙 +𝑈 𝑡𝑒𝑡,𝑙 .(11)
Thiscontrolledresidualactivation ˆ𝑒𝑡,𝑙 ispassedtothesubse-
quent model blocks, which are unaware of the intervention.
The following details the metacontroller architecture used
to learn these interventions from offline data.
The metacontroller keeps track of two summarizing
states–a summary stateℎ𝑡 of the history of activations
𝑒1:𝑡,𝑙 and an embedding 𝑠(𝑒 1:𝑇,𝑙 ) summarizing the entire
sequence of activations𝑒1:𝑇. The history is generated by a
GRU [41] and compresses information from past residual
activations in its𝑛ℎ dimensional hidden state
ℎ𝑡 =GRU(𝑒 𝑡, ℎ𝑡−1 ).(12)
This hidden state allows the metacontroller to remember
relevant information about the history at test-time. Be-
yond the history, as discussed above, the metacontroller
needs access to sequence level (acausal) information to
fulfill its overarching purpose to approximate the posterior
𝑞(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑒1:𝑇). This information is provided through theinter-
nal sequence embedder𝑓emb. It takes the trajectory of
residual stream activations𝑒1:𝑇,𝑙 produced at layer𝑙 and
summarizes it in an internal sequence embedding
𝑠(𝑒 1:𝑇,𝑙 )=𝑓 emb(𝑒1:𝑇,𝑙 )(13)
of dimension𝑛𝑠. The internal sequence embedder is param-
eterized as a SSM (cf. Appendix D.1.1) with𝐿𝑒𝑚𝑏 layers.
Conditioned on this sequence embedding thelatent pro-
posal mechanismestimates a distribution over controller
21

latent codes 𝑧𝑡 and samples it to produce a𝑛𝑧 dimensional
controller latent code proposal˜𝑧𝑡 at every timestep𝑡. The
distribution is set to be a normal
˜𝑧𝑡 ∼ N (𝜇 𝑡,Σ 𝑡),(14)
where Σ𝑡 is chosen to be diagonal for computational ef-
ficiency. The parameters for mean and variance are pro-
duced by thecontroller encoder
𝜇𝑡,Σ 𝑡 =𝑓 enc
 
𝑒𝑡,𝑙 , ℎ𝑡−1 , 𝑠
 
𝑒1:𝑇,𝑙

.(15)
Crucially, if this was the final parameterization of the
approximate posterior 𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑒1:𝑇,𝑙 ) it would not provide a
handle on the factorization of the subgoals the agent com-
posed in time when generating its behaviour. As a first step
to obtain such a factorization, the metacontroller imple-
mentsaswitchingunitproducingthetemporalintegration
rate
𝛽𝑡 =𝑓 switch(𝑒𝑡,𝑙 , ℎ𝑡−1 , 𝑧𝑡−1 ) ∈ [0,1].(16)
This integration rate is passed to thetemporal integra-
tionunitwhichusesittocombinethelatentcodeproposals
˜𝑧𝑡 sparsely in time. In particular, given𝛽𝑡, ˆ𝑧𝑡, and 𝑧𝑡−1, the
updated latent code is given by the convex combination
𝑧𝑡 =𝛽 𝑡 ⊙˜𝑧𝑡 + (1−𝛽 𝑡) ⊙𝑧 𝑡−1 .(17)
Observe, that since the˜𝑧𝑡 are stochastically generated so is
𝑧𝑡. Moreover, the𝛽𝑡 which only rely on causal information
and hence can be generated at test time provide a direct
handle on the subgoals. When𝛽𝑡 ≈ 1a new subgoal ˜𝑧𝑡
takes over while𝛽𝑡 ≈ 0indicates that the previous subgoal
𝑧𝑡−1 remains a valid explanation for the intent of the agent.
This latent controller code𝑧𝑡 is then sent through thecon-
troller decoder. The controller decoder is a hypernetwork
emitting theinternal controller
𝑈𝑡 =𝑓 hyp(𝑧 𝑡).(18)
As detailed above this linear controller is applied to the
residual stream to control the backbone thereby impacting
the predicted data log-likelihood computed at the output
of the sequence model. Crucially, the described mechanism
allows the meta controller to act on extended timescales
by maintaining the latent code𝑧𝑘 computed at timestep𝑘
for some𝑛 timesteps (by setting𝛽𝑘+1:𝑘+𝑛−1 = 0). Thereby,
sincethecomputationofthehypernetworkisdeterministic,
the same instantaneous controller𝑈𝑘 can be applied for𝑛
timesteps and corresponds to a temporally abstract action.
D.3. Internal RL policy architecture
Since the residual activation𝑒𝑡 for a single layer does not
necessarily contain all information about the raw input
history, we use a recurrent policy. A simple 1-layer SSM as
described in section D.1.1 is used. See Table A13 and A14
for more details on the architecture.
E. Additional discussions
E.1. Graphical model and ELBO derivation
Here, we present the graphical model used to derive our
unsupervisedobjective. Wedenoteby 𝑒𝑡 theresidualstream
activation at time𝑡,𝑎 𝑡 the action,𝑧 𝑡 the abstract action of
which 𝑎𝑡 is part, and𝛽𝑡 the random variable indicating a
change in the abstract action, i.e.,𝑧𝑡−1 ≠𝑧 𝑡 if 𝛽𝑡 = 1. The
assumed generative model is as follows:
𝑝(𝛽 1:𝑇, 𝑧1:𝑇, 𝑎1:𝑇 |𝑒 1:𝑇)
=
Ö
𝑡
𝑝(𝛽 𝑡 |𝑒 1:𝑡)𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡)𝑝(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡, 𝑒1:𝑡)
where𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡)=𝟙 𝑧𝑡=𝑧𝑡−1 if𝛽 𝑡 =0elseN (𝑧 𝑡 |0, 𝐼).
We want to optimize the likelihood of observing the
sequence of actions by maximizing the following evidence
lower bound (ELBO):
log𝑝(𝑎 1:𝑇 |𝑒 1:𝑇)
≥
∫
𝛽,𝑧
𝑞(𝛽 1:𝑇, 𝑧1:𝑇 |𝑒 1:𝑇, 𝑎1:𝑇) 𝑝(𝛽 1:𝑇, 𝑧1:𝑇, 𝑎1:𝑇 |𝑒 1:𝑇)
𝑞(𝛽 1:𝑇, 𝑧1:𝑇 |𝑒 1:𝑇, 𝑎1:𝑇)
where 𝑞 is the variational distribution. This lower bound
holds for any choice of𝑞. Following the graphical model,𝑞
can be factorized as follows:
𝑞(𝛽 1:𝑇, 𝑧1:𝑇 |𝑒 1:𝑇, 𝑎1:𝑇)
=
Ö
𝑡
𝑞(𝛽 𝑡 |𝑒 1:𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)𝑞(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)
where 𝑞(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)=𝟙 𝑧𝑡=𝑧𝑡−1 if 𝛽𝑡 = 0else N (𝑧𝑡 |
𝜇𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇),Σ 𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇))whereΣis diagonal.
The ELBO can then be written as
ELBO=
∑︁
𝑡
log𝑝 𝜙(𝑎𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡, 𝑒1:𝑡)
+𝐷 KL (𝑞(𝛽 𝑡 |𝑒 1:𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)||𝑝(𝛽 𝑡 |𝑒 1:𝑡))
+𝐷 KL (𝑞(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)||𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡)).
It can be shown that the last term can be further decom-
posed as
𝐷KL(𝑞(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)||𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡))
=
(
0if𝛽 𝑡 =0
𝐷KL(N (𝑧 𝑡 |𝜇 𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇),Σ 𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇))||N (0, 𝐼))if𝛽 𝑡 =1.
Continuous relaxation.In order to improve stability
during training, we make a continuous relaxation of the
latent variable 𝛽 sampled. In principle, this can be done
with the Gumbel-Sigmoid trick, but in our experiments we
simply used the probability as the latent variable.
We modify the prior and variational distribution on𝑧 to
be the continuous relaxation, i.e.,
𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡)=N (𝑧 𝑡 | (1−𝛽 𝑡)𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽 2
𝑡 𝐼)
𝑞(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)
=N (𝑧 𝑡 |𝛽 𝑡 𝜇𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇) + (1−𝛽 𝑡)𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽 2
𝑡 Σ𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇)).
This recovers the previous behavior when𝛽𝑡 equals0or1.
In the continuous case, it can be shown that the KL
divergence is
𝐷KL (𝑞(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇)||𝑝(𝑧 𝑡 |𝑧 𝑡−1 , 𝛽𝑡))
=𝐷KL (N (𝜇 𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇),Σ 𝑡 (𝑎1:𝑇))||N ((0, 𝐼)).
22

Further assumptions.In our experiments, we further
modify the variational distribution on𝛽 such that 𝑞(𝛽 𝑡 |
𝑒1:𝑡, 𝑎1:𝑇) ≈𝑞(𝛽 𝑡 |𝑒 1:𝑡), i.e., we drop the conditioning on
the future. This is done such that during internal RL, the
switching signal can be emitted causally, and eliminates
the prior matching term for the switching module. This
assumptionwasmadeinourexperimentssinceweassumed
the residual activation to be highly informative of when
switches should occur, in the environments considered. In
general however, we can relax this assumption by keeping
the future conditioning, but distilling the switches to an
unconditioned module.
E.2. Internal RL vs RL with reparametrization trick
As explained in Section C.5.1, internal RL learns a policy
over the discovered abstract action space of𝑧 by treating
the rest of the architecture as part of the environment, and
applying reinforcement learning directly to𝑧, with tem-
poral abstraction. However, there are other ways to use
the discovered abstract actions than the proposed inter-
nal RL. One perhaps more straightforward way to use the
metacontroller, is to treat this policy as a noise-injecting
submodule of the overall architecture which is still trained
by reinforcement learning in raw action space, by back-
propagating through the base autoregressive model, to the
policy using e.g. the reparametrization trick. In this sec-
tion, we analytically contrast these 2 options, discuss their
respective advantages, and motivate why we believe the
internal RL is interesting in general.
To simplify the analyses, we make a few assumptions:
• Weremainintheoutcome-supervisionsetting: asingle
reward𝑟 𝑇 is provided at the last time step𝑇.
•The switching happens𝑀times, at(𝑡 𝑚)1≤𝑚≤𝑀 .
• The abstract action policy has a fixed variance, i.e.,
it outputs 𝑧𝑡 =𝜇(𝑠 𝑡) +𝜖 𝑡 where 𝑠𝑡 is the history of
observations up to𝑡,𝜖 𝑡 ∼ N (0,1).
We now contrast the policy gradient update of the abstract
action policy, between the 2 options discussed above.
RawactionspaceRL.Performing RL in raw action space,
treating the abstract action policy as a model layer, would
result in the following expected policy gradient update:
𝔼
"
𝑟𝑇
𝑇∑︁
𝑡=1
∇𝜙 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧𝑡)
#
=𝔼
"
𝑟𝑇
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1
𝑡𝑚+1 −1∑︁
𝑡=𝑡𝑚
∇𝜙 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧𝑡𝑚 )
#
=𝔼
"
𝑟𝑇
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1
 𝑡𝑚+1 −1∑︁
𝑡=𝑡𝑚
∇𝑧𝑡𝑚 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧𝑡𝑚 )

∇𝜙(𝜇(𝑠 𝑡𝑚 +𝜖 𝑡𝑚 ))
#
=𝔼
"
𝑟𝑇
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1
 𝑡𝑚+1 −1∑︁
𝑡=𝑡𝑚
∇𝑧𝑡𝑚 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧𝑡𝑚 )

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 𝑡𝑚 )
#
.
Internal RL.In contrast, internal RL (i.e., RL directly in
𝑧-space) results in the following policy gradient update:
𝔼[𝑟 𝑇
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1
∇𝜙 log𝑃(𝑧 𝑡𝑚 |𝑠 𝑡𝑚 )]
=𝔼[𝑟 𝑇
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1
∇𝜙
−1
2 (𝑧 𝑡𝑚 −𝜇(𝑠 𝑡𝑚 )) 2]
=𝔼[𝑟 𝑇
𝑀∑︁
𝑚=1
𝜖𝑡𝑚 ∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 𝑡𝑚 )].
Note that since the forward pass is the same for both meth-
ods, the distribution over trajectory and rewards are identi-
cal. Let us then compare the variance of these 2 estimators.
For simplicity, we now further assume𝑀= 1. This means
a single 𝑧 is drawn at the beginning of the sequence. The
law of total variance gives
𝕍

𝑟𝑇
∑︁
𝑡
∇𝑧 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧0)

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0)

=𝕍  𝔼

𝑟𝑇
∑︁
𝑡
∇𝑧 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧0) |𝑧 0

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0)
+𝔼  𝕍

𝑟𝑇
∑︁
𝑡
∇𝑧 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧0) |𝑧 0

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0)
=𝕍  𝔼

PGraw(𝑧 0)

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0) +𝔼  𝕍

PGraw(𝑧 0)

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0)
where PGraw(𝑧)=𝑟 𝑇
Í
𝑡 ∇𝑧 log𝜋(𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡, 𝑧) is the raw action
space policy gradient Monte Carlo estimator w.r.t. “param-
eter”𝑧.
Similarly,
𝕍

𝑟𝑇 𝜖0∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0)

=𝕍  𝔼

𝑟𝑇 |𝜖 0

𝜖0∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0) +𝔼  𝕍

𝑟𝑇 |𝜖 0

𝜖0∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0)
=𝕍  𝔼

PGz (𝑧 0)

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0) +𝔼  𝕍

PGz (𝑧 0)

∇𝜙𝜇(𝑠 0)
where PGz (𝑧)=𝑟 𝑇 𝜖0 is the policy gradient Monte Carlo
estimator of a bandit problem.
We see that the 2 expressions differ only inPG(𝑧). The
tradeoffs are evident:
• The expectation ofPGraw is more structured thanPGz.
In particular, its variance w.r.t. epsilon could even be
0 in the first, whereas it scales with the dimension of
epsilon in the second.
• However, thevarianceofPGraw scaleswiththenumber
of timestep and with the raw action space dimension,
since noise is accumulated at every timestep. On the
other hand,PGz does not scale with anything (it is the
variance of the return, i.e.,𝑂(1)). Therefore, if the
abstract action discovery was successful such that a
compact space of𝑧 was identified, with long-horizon
abstract actions, the policy gradient estimator’s vari-
ance and corresponding credit assignment can be dra-
matically improved, especially for very long horizon
tasks.
23